<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en-US">
  <head>
    <title>Does God Suffer?</title>
    <link href="../styles/page-template.xpgt" rel="stylesheet" type="application/vnd.adobe-page-template+xml"/>
    <meta content="urn:uuid:e0000000-0000-0000-0000-000004626051" name="Adept.expected.resource"/>
    <meta http-equiv="Content-Type" content="text/html; charset=utf-8"/>
  <link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="../../stylesheet.css"/>
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="../../page_styles.css"/>
</head>
  <body class="calibre">
<p class="cip"><a id="page_iv" class="calibre3"></a>Copyright © T&amp;T Clark Ltd, 2000</p>
<p class="cipf">Published in Great Britain by T&amp;T Clark Ltd,</p>
<p class="cipf">59 George Street, Edinburgh EH2 2LQ, Scotland</p>
<p class="cip1"><a href="http://www.tandtclark.co.uk" class="calibre3">www.tandtclark.co.uk</a></p>
<p class="cip1">This edition published under license from T&amp;T Clark Ltd by<br class="calibre4"/>University of Notre Dame Press</p>
<p class="cipf">Notre Dame, IN 46556</p>
<p class="cip">All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted, in any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording or otherwise, without the prior permission of University of Notre Dame Press.</p>
<p class="cip">First published 2000</p>
<p class="cip">0–268–00890–6 (pb.)</p>
<p class="cip">Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data</p>
<p class="cip">Weinandy, Thomas G. (Thomas Gerard)</p>
<p class="cipf">Does God suffer? / Thomas Weinandy.</p>
<p class="cipf">p. cm.</p>
<p class="cipf">Includes bibliographical references.</p>
<p class="cipf">ISBN 0–268–00890–6 (pbk. : alk. paper)</p>
<p class="cipf">1. Suffering of God.  2. Suffering of God—History of doctrines.</p>
<p class="cipf">I. Title.</p>
<p class="cipf">BT453. S8W45 1999</p>
<p class="cipf">231′.4—dc21</p>
<p class="cipf">99–39506</p>
<p class="cip">ISBN 9780268161668</p>
<p class="cip">This e-Book was converted from the original source file by a third-party vendor. Readers who notice any formatting, textual, or readability issues are encouraged to contact the publisher at <a href="mailto:ebooks@nd.edu" class="calibre3">ebooks@nd.edu</a>.</p>
</body>
</html>
