<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en-US">
  <head>
    <title>Does God Suffer?</title>
    <link href="../styles/page-template.xpgt" rel="stylesheet" type="application/vnd.adobe-page-template+xml"/>
    <meta content="urn:uuid:e0000000-0000-0000-0000-000004626051" name="Adept.expected.resource"/>
    <meta http-equiv="Content-Type" content="text/html; charset=utf-8"/>
  <link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="../../stylesheet.css"/>
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="../../page_styles.css"/>
</head>
  <body class="calibre">
<p class="ctfm"><a id="page_vii" class="calibre2"></a><a href="06_Contents.xhtml#pre" id="pre" class="calibre2">Preface</a></p>
<p class="pn">I did not want to write this book. In August of 1975 I completed my doctoral dissertation on the relationship between God’s immutability and the Incarnation – on how an unchanging God can actually <i class="calibre5">become</i> man.<sup class="calibre6">1</sup> In attempting to bring clarity to that issue I became acutely aware that the question of God’s impassibility, particularly that God, within his divine nature, does not experience inner negative emotional states such as suffering, was indeed even more problematic. One of my supervisors, H.P. Owen (the other being E.L. Mascall) wrote at the time that the impassibility of God ‘is the most questionable aspect of classical theism.’<sup class="calibre6">2</sup></p>
<p class="in">For approximately twenty years I tried to avoid the topic, even though it incessantly arose within lectures, tutorials, seminars, and even within ‘pub’ conversations. I was aware of what the majority of the contemporary theological community was teaching, and I knew what it had concluded – God is passible and so he suffers. I basically knew why such was proposed – because God, being personal, is loving and compassionate, he surely suffers in solidarity with those he loves. I too, obviously, held that God is loving, but I was not comfortable with the inference that he must therefore suffer. I was not convinced by the arguments, though I did acknowledge that they were intellectually and emotionally persuasive, and that I could not easily dismiss or refute them. While part of me wanted to throw myself into what I considered an exciting and significant philosophical and theological fray, another part of me fearfully refused to become engaged.</p>
<p class="in">What frightened me was not simply the need to confront the biblical evidence where God, especially in the Old Testament, is said to experience differing emotional states, including suffering. I suspected that the truth of such statements needed to be interpreted from within a broader and deeper revelation of who God is. Nor was I particularly bothered by the historical questions. Because of my knowledge of the Fathers and Aquinas, who held God to be impassible, I instinctively knew that they could not possibly be guilty of all, though maybe of some, of the errors of which they were so frequently accused. Moreover, since I considered <a id="page_viii" class="calibre3"></a>myself an adequate philosopher, neither was I particularly timid in the face of the philosophical issues, though I knew that these would be the most knotty. I confidently trusted that, given some hard thought, I could satisfactorily address them. Nor was I put off by the doctrinal and theological concerns. I felt that I could ultimately address the trinitarian, incarnational and soteriological questions in quite a creative and insightful manner. While it would have required some effort on my part to address all of these concerns in a comprehensive and scholarly fashion, they did not frighten me.</p>
<p class="in">No, what I feared most was Auschwitz – with all of its contemporary iconic meaning and pathos. With the Holocaust and similar events of horrendous human suffering as the existential backdrop, how could I write a book in which I would argue that God is impassible and so does not suffer? How could such a book, and it was this book that I knew I must write, even be contemplated? Within this contemporary setting, to write such a book would demand that it be not only academically sound, but also, and even more so, emotionally compelling. I feared that my book, should I ever choose to write it, would lack this latter virtue, and so for many years it never was attempted. To use a favorite phrase of one of my esteemed colleagues, Professor R. Swinburne, I refused ‘to grasp the nettle.’</p>
<p class="in">On 13 February 1995 Mrs Jane Williams, then of Darton, Longman and Todd, having read my book, <i class="calibre5">Does God Change?</i>, and finding it ‘a breath of fresh air,’ wrote to me asking if I would be interested ‘in doing a more popular and accessible book in defence of impassibility.’ I wryly smiled at the words ‘popular’ and ‘accessible,’ but I consented to ‘give it a go.’ I gave such consent aware that, because of the complexity of the topic, and more so because of my own need to work through all of the ‘unpopular’ academic questions that required attention, I would probably be unable to write such a ‘popular’ book. My suspicion was correct, and Darton, Longman and Todd, having considered some draft chapters, rightly turned it down. Nonetheless, it was Mrs Williams who compelled me to conquer my fear and to undertake, finally, the topic I had so long avoided. For this I owe her a great deal of gratitude.</p>
<p class="in">In response to those who advocate a passible and so suffering God I endeavor, in this book, to accomplish two ends. First, I strive to refute what I consider to be the often erroneous arguments and assumptions that support the notion of a suffering God, and in so doing diminish the sincere but ultimately, I believe, often misconceived sentiments attached to them. Second, and more important, I offer a positive Christian view of God and of his relationship to humankind, with its history of grief, which, I trust, is more biblically authentic, more historically accurate, more philosophically convincing, more theologically persuasive, and so more emotionally gratifying.</p>
<p class="in">I attempt the above by systematically, in the various chapters, addressing each of the issues concerning God and human suffering. I attempt to safeguard the logical progression of my arguments, both within the individual chapters and in the sequence of the chapters, so as to ensure that all the distinct elements are properly placed and related. In so doing I hope that the reader will be able to give assent at each critical <a id="page_ix" class="calibre3"></a>juncture and so, in the end, concur with the whole. I normally limit the dialogue with my opponents to the footnotes so as not to detract from my own positive presentation within the body of the text.</p>
<p class="in">Because the question of God’s impassibility touches on so many issues, I desire in this book to be as comprehensive as possible so as to provide as complete as possible a theology of the Christian understanding of God and suffering. In <a href="08_Chapter01.xhtml" class="calibre3">Chapter 1</a> I present a thorough and, hopefully, accurate account of the arguments (with their various authors) in favor of a passible and suffering God. In <a href="09_Chapter02.xhtml" class="calibre3">Chapter 2</a> I articulate my own theological method in order to ensure that it is clear what I am and am not attempting to do in this book.</p>
<p class="in"><a href="10_Chapter03_split_000.xhtml" class="calibre3">Chapters 3</a> to <a href="14_Chapter07.xhtml" class="calibre3">7</a> examine the various topics that bear directly upon God’s impassibility as God and to his relationship to the created order, especially to human beings. These include such topics as: the biblical understanding of God and his ability to act within history, and so relate to humankind; the patristic concept of God; the notion of God as Creator and the type of relationship the act of creation establishes with the created order; and what it means for God to be impassible, and yet be merciful, compassionate and loving.</p>
<p class="in">In <a href="15_Chapter08.xhtml" class="calibre3">Chapter 8</a> I discuss the Incarnation, specifically the truth that the Son of God actually did suffer as man. <a href="16_Chapter09.xhtml" class="calibre3">Chapter 9</a> is an exposition of my understanding of New Testament soteriology, that is, what Jesus has accomplished through his suffering and death. <a href="17_Chapter10.xhtml" class="calibre3">Chapter 10</a>, the final chapter, examines the Christian experience and interpretation of suffering in the light of Jesus and his work of redemption.</p>
<p class="in">There are a few philosophical lacunae. I have not, for example, treated, in the light of his impassibility, God’s eternity and omniscience in relationship to time and contingent events. I felt that to undertake these and similar topics, which are in themselves complex, would unnecessarily add to an already lengthy book. Moreover, from what I do say on other issues, one could surmise how I might approach these questions as well.</p>
<p class="in">Many friends and colleagues have helped me in various ways in the writing of this book. First, I want especially to thank Professors David Burrell, Germain Grisez, Paul Helm, Keith Ward, and John Webster; Drs Mark Edwards, William Fey, Peter Hocken and Uwe Lang; and Mr Stephen Clark for reading various draft chapters of this work and offering many useful comments and criticisms. The reader should not assume, however, that all of the above agree completely, if at all, with my arguments and conclusions. I am also grateful to all those who helped me locate bibliography – Drs John Dillon and Norman Solomon; Messrs Patrick Hayes, Nicholas Healy, Mark Hutson, and Daniel Keating; and Miss Clodagh Brett, who also proofread almost the entire manuscript. Then there are those who offered their encouragement and much needed prayers – Mrs Kathleen Jones and Judith Virnelson, my Capuchin brothers Frs Robert McCreary and James Menkhus, and my good friend Fr James Overton, who, while ardently supporting my efforts, often ‘devilishly’ queried my ‘indefensible’ position. I also am grateful to Mr Stratford Caldecott of T&amp;T Clark for guiding the co-publishing of this book with Notre Dame University Press. Last, I deeply appreciate the <a id="page_x" class="calibre3"></a>fraternal support of the Capuchin friars of my own province in the United States, especially those at Sacred Heart Friary in Washington, DC, and that of the friars here at Greyfriars in Oxford.</p>
<p class="in">While I was reluctant to undertake the writing of this book, having done so, I am glad that I did. It has forced me to consider issues that are at the heart of the Christian gospel, and in so doing I have come to a greater love and appreciation of it. Moreover, the writing of this book has compelled me to consider what I feared the most – the authentic and impassioned human cry for a loving and just God in the midst of untold suffering. I never forgot, in the years of its making, that this book was being written in the shadow of Auschwitz and its like. As well as being a scholarly work, I hope, then, that this book meets, in some small way, the genuine emotional needs of a wounded world longing for a loving God.</p>
<p class="patr">The Feast of Mater Dolorosa, 1999</p>
<p class="ntslf"><sup class="calibre7">1</sup>  This was subsequently revised and published as <i class="calibre5">Does God Change?: The Word’s Becoming in the Incarnation</i> (Petersham: St Bede’s Publications, 1985).</p>
<p class="ntsl"><sup class="calibre7">2</sup>  <i class="calibre5">Concepts of Deity</i> (London: Macmillan, 1971), p. 24.</p>
</body>
</html>
