<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en-US">
  <head>
    <title>Does God Suffer?</title>
    <link href="../styles/page-template.xpgt" rel="stylesheet" type="application/vnd.adobe-page-template+xml"/>
    <meta content="urn:uuid:e0000000-0000-0000-0000-000004626051" name="Adept.expected.resource"/>
    <meta http-equiv="Content-Type" content="text/html; charset=utf-8"/>
  <link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="../../stylesheet.css"/>
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="../../page_styles.css"/>
</head>
  <body class="calibre">
<p class="cta"><a id="page_1" class="calibre2"></a><a href="06_Contents.xhtml#ch1" id="ch1" class="calibre2">1</a></p>
<p class="cs"><a href="06_Contents.xhtml#ch1" class="calibre2">The God Who Suffers</a></p>
<p class="pn">‘Theology has no falser idea than that of the impassibility of God.’<sup class="calibre6">1</sup> This severe judgment, first made by A.M. Fairbairn in 1893, is now shared, to a greater or lesser degree, by many, if not most, contemporary theologians. Since the latter part of the nineteenth century, there has been a growing consensus that the traditional claim, held to be axiomatic since the Fathers of the church, of God’s impassibility is no longer defensible. Rather, to this growing consensus it has become obvious, seemingly so obvious that one might wonder why it was not apparent from the start, that God must be passible. This break with the past understanding of God is so sharp and the new consensus is so strong that D.D. Williams refers to this phenomenon as a ‘structural shift’ within theology.<sup class="calibre6">2</sup> R. Goetz simply designates it ‘the new orthodoxy.’<sup class="calibre6">3</sup> M. Sarot, who is probably the most prolific advocate of divine passibility, maintains, and rightly so, that ‘during this present century the idea that God is immutable and impassible has slowly but surely given way to the idea that God is sensitive, emotional and passionate…. By now the rejection of the ancient doctrine of divine impassibility has so much become a theological common place, that many theologians do not even feel the need to argue for it.’<sup class="calibre6">4</sup> So confident is Moltmann of the success of the present consensus that he can write: ‘The doctrine of the essential impassibility of the divine nature now seems finally to be disappearing from the Christian doctrine of God.’<sup class="calibre6">5</sup></p>
<p class="in">What has brought about such a radical reconception of God? How, in only one hundred years, has the tradition of two thousand years, so readily and so assuredly, seemingly been overturned? There are a multiplicity of factors, but they all cluster around three headings: the prevailing social and cultural milieu, biblical revelation, and contemporary <a id="page_2" class="calibre3"></a>philosophy. All three are intertwined and they all mutually support one another. Using these three headings, I will in this chapter summarize, as clearly and objectively as I can, the various arguments on behalf of the passibility of God.<sup class="calibre6">6</sup> I will also allow, as much as possible, the advocates to speak for themselves.</p>
<p class="sec"><b class="calibre8">The Contemporary Milieu</b></p>
<p class="pn">The conviction that God is passible did not arise within a dispassionate academic setting. Nor was it nurtured within the context of what it might mean for God to be passible in various ways, that is: Is God passible in his will, knowledge, love, joy, anger, sorrow, and suffering? Historically, the question of God’s passibility focused primarily and, at times almost exclusively, upon the issue of whether God could suffer. The catalyst for affirming the passibility of God, one that is still intensely operative, is human suffering.<sup class="calibre6">7</sup> God must be passible for he must not only be in the midst of human suffering, but he himself must also share in and partake of human suffering. Succinctly, God is passible because God must suffer.</p>
<p class="in">The passibility of God was first advocated within an English Anglican setting in the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries. With the demise of nineteenth-century optimism and in the face of the social suffering caused by the Industrial Revolution and the agony of World War I, the passibility of God found a cultural climate in which to sprout. By 1928 Brasnett could clearly perceive the passionate drive within the <a id="page_3" class="calibre3"></a>already cultural and intellectual groundswell for a passible God. ‘Men feel, and perhaps will feel increasingly, that a God who is not passible, who is exempt from pain or suffering, is a God of little value to a suffering humanity.’<sup class="calibre6">8</sup></p>
<p class="in">Auschwitz, however, became the interpretative experience that advanced the phenomenal growth in and acceptance of the tenet that God is passible. No other event has so impacted the contemporary conception of God, especially concerning his passibility.<sup class="calibre6">9</sup> Again and again, in books and articles advocating God’s passibility, E. Wiesel’s horrific story is told.</p>
<p class="bq">The SS hanged two Jewish men and a youth in front of the whole camp. The men died quickly, but the death throes of the youth lasted for half an hour. ‘Where is God? Where is he?’ someone asked behind me. As the youth still hung in torment in the noose after a long time, I heard the man call again, ‘Where is God now?’ And I heard a voice in myself answer: ‘Where is he? He is here. He is hanging there on the gallows.’<sup class="calibre6">10</sup></p>
<p class="in"><a id="page_4" class="calibre3"></a>Moltmann, who himself was a prisoner of war, wrote in response to Wiesel’s story:</p>
<p class="bq">Any other answer would be blasphemy. There cannot be any other Christian answer to the question of this torment. To speak here of a God who could not suffer would make God a demon. To speak here of an absolute God would make God an annihilating nothingness. To speak here of an indifferent God would condemn men to indifference.<sup class="calibre6">11</sup></p>
<p class="in">In a more recent study Moltmann further develops the need for a suffering God in the light of Auschwitz.</p>
<p class="bq">There can be no theology ‘after Auschwitz,’ which does not take up the theology <i class="calibre5">in Auschwitz</i>, i.e. the prayers and cries of the victims. God was present where the Shema of Israel and the Lord’s Prayer were prayed. As a companion in suffering God gave comfort where humanly there was nothing to hope for in that hell. The inexpressible sufferings in Auschwitz were also the sufferings of God himself.<sup class="calibre6">12</sup></p>
<p class="pn">Moltmann is also concerned about the whole question of human suffering in relationship to God. ‘The suffering of a single innocent child is an irrefutable rebuttal of the notion of the almighty and kindly God in heaven. For a God who lets the innocent suffer and who permits senseless death is not worthy to be called God at all.’<sup class="calibre6">13</sup> For Moltmann, only a God who suffers in solidarity with the innocent is worthy of the name God.</p>
<p class="in">The passibility of God has also found support in the aftermath of Hiroshima. Kitamori, a Japanese Lutheran, wrote a very influential book in which he argued that only a God who suffers can theologically ground and make sense of the immense pain and suffering within the contemporary world. For Kitamori, the pain of God is the most central truth of <a id="page_5" class="calibre3"></a>the gospel.<sup class="calibre6">14</sup> Equally, the North Korean theologian J.Y. Lee states that ‘the concept of divine suffering is not only the core of our faith but the uniqueness of Christianity.’<sup class="calibre6">15</sup></p>
<p class="in">This same theme was taken up within the context of the suffering due to racial injustice and the struggle to assure racial equality. The black theologian, J. Cone, argued that God, as witnessed in the exodus event, identifies and suffers with the marginalized and the oppressed, such as the blacks of America.<sup class="calibre6">16</sup></p>
<p class="in">The experience of immense global human suffering – innocent, violent and unjust – of recent and present generations created a psychological climate and an emotional state that cried out for a God who not only witnessed it, but actually participated in it. The human experience demanded that its experience be God’s experience.</p>
<p class="bq">An apathetic God who, staying in his own bliss, as the unmoved observer of misfortune ‘is by contemporary man justly experienced as cynical and readily dismissed,’ says Brantschen. So the idea catches on: God’s response to suffering is to be found in his sympathizing and compassionate love. He heals our suffering by sharing in it.<sup class="calibre6">17</sup></p>
<p class="in"><a id="page_6" class="calibre3"></a>Why did the impassible God give way to the passible God? ‘The basic problem of traditional theism, with its purely active, impassible God, is the problem of theodicy: how can an all-powerful and invulnerable creator and ruler of the world be justified in the face of the enormity of human suffering?’<sup class="calibre6">18</sup> Such a question, many conclude today, can only be answered if one simply acknowledges that God is passible and so suffers.</p>
<p class="in">Thus, that God is passible sprouted, took root and thrived within the religious and theological community – Jewish and Christian – immersed in the social and cultural environment just described. Bonhoeffer, who himself suffered and died in a Nazi concentration camp, pointedly expressed the exact sentiment of that community. ‘Only the suffering God can help.’<sup class="calibre6">19</sup></p>
<p class="sec"><b class="calibre8">The Biblical Notion of God</b></p>
<p class="pn">The contemporary experience of human suffering, which seemed to demand a passible God, found a ready ally and firm warrant, it appeared, in the biblical revelation of God. Thus contemporary theologians, in turning to the Bible, saw the God portrayed within it as not only sanctioning their felt need for a God who suffered, but one that actually advocated what they had perceived. On the question of a passible God who suffered, the experience of present-day men and women and the revelation of the Bible appeared to be substantially the same. Thus contemporary experience and biblical interpretation mutually supported and promoted one another on this issue. But what is it that contemporary theologians found in the Bible that supported and nurtured their conviction that God is passible? We will first briefly examine the Old Testament and then, again briefly, the New Testament.</p>
<p class="psec"><i class="calibre5"><b class="calibre9">The Passionate God of the Old Testament</b></i></p>
<p class="pn">God revealed himself in the Old Testament as a living personal God who acted in time and history, and thus a God who can be experienced by human beings. He was intimately involved in the affairs of the Hebrew people. ‘For what great nation is there that has a god so near to it as the Lord our God is to us whenever we call upon him’ (Deut. 4:6). So familiar was God that he actually revealed to the Israelites his very name: Yahweh – I AM WHO AM (see Exod. 3:13–15). As the living God who truly is, he was ever active. He not only made the heavens and earth, but he also heard the cry of his enslaved people in Egypt. He suffered over their plight, and he determined, in his mercy, to rescue them (see Exod. 2:23–25; 3:7–8). He made convenants with his people, and so bound them to himself (see Gen. 17, Exod. 24). Yahweh will be with his people so that he will be their God and they shall be his people (see Lev. 26:12; Jer. 11:4, 30:22).</p>
<p class="bq"><a id="page_7" class="calibre3"></a>Has any people ever heard the voice of a god speaking out of a fire, as you have heard, and lived? Or has any god ever attempted to go and take a nation for himself from the midst of another nation, by trials, by signs and wonders, by war, by a mighty hand and an outstretched arm, and by terrifying displays of power, as the Lord your God did for you in Egypt before your very eyes? (Deut. 4:33–34).</p>
<p class="in">The reason for all of this is simply that God ‘loved your fathers and chose their children after them’ (Deut. 4:37, see also Exod. 2:25, 3:1–6, 3:15–17). Thus God showed himself to be a God of compassion and, above all, a God of faithful love (<i class="calibre5">hesed</i>) (see Exod. 34:6–7; Is. 63:7–9).</p>
<p class="in">Thus Yahweh is a God who is approachable. Not only does Abraham converse with him (see Gen. 15:1–6), but Moses is able to speak to God ‘face to face’ (Exod. 33:11). The Psalms are not only prayers of praise, thanksgiving, repentance and intercession, but they also proclaim God’s mighty deeds – past and present. The Psalms declare that Yahweh is a God who delivers his people in times of distress (see Pss 18; 30; 40:9–10; 66:13–20). They affirm that Yahweh is a God who ‘acts,’ ‘forgives,’ ‘heals,’ ‘redeems,’ ‘crowns,’ ‘satisfies’ and ‘works’ (see Ps. 103:5–9). In all of these actions Yahweh again manifests his primary covenantal attribute – <i class="calibre5">hesed</i> – steadfast love (see Pss 59:10, 16–17; 119:41, 64, 76, 88, 124, 149, 159).</p>
<p class="in">Moreover, Yahweh reveals himself, especially in the prophets, to be a God who grieves over the sin of his people. He is distressed by their unfaithfulness, and suffers over their sinful plight. Hosea, in words that attest to the great love and pathos of God, states that when Israel was a child, he loved him. He taught Ephraim how to walk and enfolded his people in his arms. He led them ‘with cords of human kindness, with bands of love’ (Hos. 11:1–4).</p>
<p class="in">Yet Israel became disloyal. So disheartened was God by their hard-heartedness that he actually became angry. However, ‘my heart recoils within me; my compassion grows warm and tender. I will not execute my fierce anger; I will not again destroy Ephraim; for I am God and not mortal; the Holy One in your midst and I will not come in wrath’ (Hos. 11:8–9). While God’s wrath, in the Old Testament, rises in justice, it is always tempered by his forgiving and compassionate love, a love that even moves God to repent of what he had intended to do (see Exod. 32:11–14; 1 Sam. 15:11).<sup class="calibre6">20</sup></p>
<p class="in">Because the Old Testament portrays God in such a manner as exemplified in the above, and in other numerous and similar passages, <a id="page_8" class="calibre3"></a>contemporary theologians conclude that God, as found in the Old Testament, must be changeable and passible. M. Steen writes:</p>
<p class="bq1">In the biblical-theological movement a static concept of God has been exchanged for a dynamic perspective in which God is conceived as personal, loving, and history-making; as such, He is involved with his creation and his people. It is striking that God is represented in an ‘anthropomorphic’ manner in the Bible. Even such human feelings as love, anger and sorrowful regret are attributed to Him. Hence theologians increasingly wish to valorize the so-called ‘anthropomorphic’ and ‘anthropopathic’ God. So the living God of the Bible comes into focus.<sup class="calibre6">21</sup></p>
<p class="in">Moreover, it is the ability of God to suffer that captivates the minds and imagination of contemporary theologians. If God is truly involved in the lives of people, if he actually enters into and acts within time and history, and most of all, if he does so as the God of love, then such a God must, by necessity, experience suffering. As van Beeck writes: ‘Since the faithful remainder of Israel was now a suffering nation, the conviction arose that God must be more, not less, closely involved with it. But this in turn meant that God must be in a real sense <i class="calibre5">suffering</i> as well.’<sup class="calibre6">22</sup> It is not only that God acts within history to change history, nor that he acts within the lives of human beings in order to affect them, but equally the course of history and the vicissitudes of human life affect and change him.</p>
<p class="in">Heschel’s book on the prophets has had an immense influence on contemporary theologians in their understanding of the Old Testament notion of God.<sup class="calibre6">23</sup> Heschel speaks of God’s ‘pathos’ – a pathos that suffers in love. He suffers an anguish that penetrates his very being as God. Fiddes describes this divine pathos.</p>
<p class="bq1">The sorrow of God because his people reject his loving care leads to <a id="page_9" class="calibre3"></a>a unique kind of pain which is ascribed to God, a state of feeling which is characterized by the prophets as <i class="calibre5">a blend of love and wrath</i>. This is presented as a pathos which is God’s own pathos.<sup class="calibre6">24</sup></p>
<p class="in">Similar to the prophet Hosea quoted above, Fiddes sees this pathos especially exemplified in the prophet Jeremiah. ‘Is Ephraim my dear son? Is he the child I delight in? As often as I speak against him, I still remember him. Therefore I am deeply moved for him; I will surely have mercy on him’ (Jer. 31:20). This pathos embodies God’s empathy towards and his sympathy with his people. Because of God’s pathos, he is willing to suffer because of, on behalf of and in union with his people.<sup class="calibre6">25</sup></p>
<p class="in">Love is the foundation of God’s pathos, and thus the foundation of his suffering. Lee argues that because God’s very nature is defined by love – <i class="calibre5">Agape</i> – then it follows that God must be passible.</p>
<p class="bq1">Love is the fulfilment of suffering, and suffering is the enduring strength of love. Suffering is subsequent to love, and love is carried out by suffering. These two do not stand side by side and separate from one another, but are united together.<sup class="calibre6">26</sup></p>
<p class="in">For Moltmann, ‘Were God incapable of suffering in any respect, and therefore in an absolute sense, then he would also be incapable of love.’<sup class="calibre6">27</sup> ‘A God who cannot suffer cannot love either.’<sup class="calibre6">28</sup> Fiddes argues in a similar fashion: ‘Now, if God is not less than personal, and if the claim that “God is love” is to have any recognizable continuity with our normal experience <a id="page_10" class="calibre3"></a>of love, the conclusion seems inescapable that a loving God must be a sympathetic and therefore suffering God.’<sup class="calibre6">29</sup> F. Varillon asks: ‘Comment croire que Dieu est Amour, s’il faut penser que notre souffrance ne l’etteint pas dans son être éternel?’<sup class="calibre6">30</sup> Even Galot, who is rather theologically cautious, argues that God’s love cannot exclude suffering.</p>
<p class="bq1">Par contre, l’amour de Dieu pour l’humanité comporte nécessairement le risque de souffrance. En effet, cet amour, en se portant vers de êtres libres de s’opposer à lui, ne peut prétendre, s’il veut être absolument sincère et logique avec lui-même, exclure toute possibilité de conflit et de douleur. Il serait impossible de concevoir un amour divine qui aurait respecté la liberté humaine et ne se serait pas exposé à souffrir du péché.<sup class="calibre6">31</sup></p>
<p class="in"><a id="page_11" class="calibre3"></a>Because God’s very nature is love, many authors point out that God’s suffering, and thus his passibility, is not something that is forced upon him, but something that he willingly assumes out of love.<sup class="calibre6">32</sup> His passibility is something that flows from his willingness to create human beings and to love them even if it means he must suffer with them and because of them. Steen comments that ‘those who favour the notion of divine passibility refer to a distinction between suffering as a purely fatal, passive and paralysing event and suffering as a free, constructive act of solidarity and openness.’<sup class="calibre6">33</sup> In God then, according to Moltmann, we find exemplified to the supreme degree ‘the voluntary laying oneself open to another and allowing oneself to be intimately affected by him; that is to say, the suffering of passionate love.’<sup class="calibre6">34</sup> For Pannenberg, God, because of the plenitude of his being, can freely open himself to new possibilities in which he himself is intimately involved.<sup class="calibre6">35</sup> Ward holds that in creating God freely opened himself up to the world.</p>
<p class="bq1">If God can experience the goods of creation, then God must also experience its sorrows. They must enter into God’s experiential knowledge of created being. If one can properly speak of divine joy in the beauty of the universe, one must also speak of divine grief or pity at the sorrows.<sup class="calibre6">36</sup></p>
<p class="pn">For Johnson, God does not suffer passively because of deficiency, but rather ‘speech about Holy Wisdom’s suffering with and for the world points to an act of freedom, the freedom of love deliberately and generously shared in accord with her own integrity.’<sup class="calibre6">37</sup> While Galot says that God is invulnerable in himself, yet he makes himself vulnerable in his relations with human beings. ‘La Bible nous montre précisément comment par l’alliance il s’est rendu vulnérable. En établissant des relations amicales avec le peuple que lui-même a choisi, il s’est mis à son niveau, et volontairement a accepté d’avance toutes le souffrances qui pourraient en résulter pour lui.’<sup class="calibre6">38</sup></p>
<p class="in"><a id="page_12" class="calibre3"></a>The arguments on behalf of a passible and suffering God based upon the Old Testament follow a very logical and compelling pattern. If God is living, personal and, above all, loving, and if this God acts in time and history and within the lives of human beings, then such a God must, it is argued, be passible and capable of suffering. Pollard is so confident that <a id="page_13" class="calibre3"></a>the Old Testament bears witness to a passible and suffering God that he states that if God cannot experience passion and suffering ‘we have either to re-write the Scriptures or treat them as a collection of books embodying primitive anthropomorphic conceptions of God.’<sup class="calibre6">39</sup></p>
<p class="in"><a id="page_14" class="calibre3"></a>Creel summarizes the logic and the arguments on behalf of the passibility of God very well.</p>
<p class="bq1">All of these rejections of divine impassibility seem to be motivated by a clash between the conviction that God should be thought of as a loving person and the further conviction that an impassible being cannot be a loving person…. Hence, for biblical theists, if there is a conflict between God being loving and being impassible, it is impassibility that must be modified or ejected. To go at the point another way, it is conceivable that one could affirm that God is love and deny that God is impassible yet remain a Christian, but it is inconceivable that one could affirm that God is impassible and deny that God is love, yet remain a Christian …. Hence, whether God is impassible is negotiable (for biblical theists), but whether God is love is not.<sup class="calibre6">40</sup></p>
<p class="in">While it is the Old Testament that lays the groundwork for subscribing to a passible God, it is the New Testament’s proclamation that the Son of God has become man and died on the cross that brings the notion of a passible and suffering God to its full and complete resolution.</p>
<p class="psec"><i class="calibre5"><b class="calibre9">The Suffering of the Crucified God</b></i></p>
<p class="pn">The heart of the Christian kerygma is that the Son of God became man and lived a true and full human life. Within that human life the Son’s death on the cross stands as the consummate event. From the Incarnation and the cross theologians argue for God’s passibility on three interconnected levels. The first pertains to God in himself, the second pertains to the Son as man, and the third pertains to the Father’s and Son’s relationship.</p>
<p class="in">First, so great was God’s love for us that he sent his Son into the world (see Jn 3:16). Thus the Incarnation is the supreme paradigm and exemplification of God’s passible pathos towards and empathy with humankind.</p>
<p class="bq1">Divine passibility was not the consequence of incarnation but the Incarnation was the consequence of divine passibility …. The Incarnation is certainly not the beginning of divine passibility but the continuation of it with an intensification in time and space.<sup class="calibre6">41</sup></p>
<p class="in">Moreover, those who argue for the passibility of God find, especially in the cross, their conclusive and decisive argument. The cross expresses fully the eternal nature of the suffering God. ‘God suffers on the cross in <i class="calibre5">oneness</i> with the person of Christ; God suffers <i class="calibre5">eternally</i> in the cross; <a id="page_15" class="calibre3"></a>God is most <i class="calibre5">Godlike</i> in the suffering of the cross.’<sup class="calibre6">42</sup> Following the Johannine principle that he who sees Jesus sees the Father (see Jn 14:9), Moltmann argues, ‘that the historical passion of Christ reveals the eternal passion of God, then the self-sacrifice of love is God’s eternal nature.’<sup class="calibre6">43</sup> E. Jüngel states that the cross ‘has destroyed the axiom of absoluteness, the axiom of apathy, and the axiom of immutability, all of which are unsuitable axioms for the Christian concept of God.’<sup class="calibre6">44</sup> The Incarnation and the cross are the fullest disclosure of the passible God, already witnessed to in the Old Testament, and thus the supreme verification that what was partially revealed in the Old Testament is eternally true.</p>
<p class="in">Second, the Father’s sending of his Son not only reveals the passible, suffering love of God in himself, but it equally manifests the passibility of his divine Son. Jesus manifests his great love for us on the cross where he dies to obtain salvation for the whole of humankind. Now if it is truly the Son of God who exists as man and, as man, dies on the cross, then it must be the Son of God who experiences all that human life entails and, most importantly, he must experience suffering and even death itself.</p>
<p class="in">The christological tradition, inherited from the Fathers and the Scholastics, held that the Son of God did suffer, but <i class="calibre5">as man and not as God</i>. As God, the Son remained impassible, but as man he was passible. The illogic of this position arises, it is argued, because the tradition, as will be shown shortly, was shackled by the Platonic notion of God’s impassibility and the two-nature model of the Incarnation that resulted from it.<sup class="calibre6">45</sup> However, if the Son of God did actually become man then it would seem, by necessity, that the Son suffered not only in his humanity but in his divinity as well. For Pollard, to ascribe impassibility to God renders the Incarnation impossible, or at the very least makes for Docetism, that is, God only <i class="calibre5">appears</i> to be man. ‘To say that the Son of God, as divine, is impassible is to assert that the divine in Christ was unaffected by the human; and therefore that there is no real Incarnation, or if there is an Incarnation, it is meaningless.’<sup class="calibre6">46</sup> If Christ is one then what pertains to the humanity pertains also to the divinity.</p>
<p class="in">Moltmann argues that the traditional use of the communication of idioms, that is, the predicating of divine and human attributes to the one <a id="page_16" class="calibre3"></a>person of Christ, cannot be seen merely as abstract or as the ascribing of attributes to one or other of the natures, but must be ascribed to the whole Christ. Thus what pertains to the humanity of Christ must also affect his divinity as well. The oneness of Christ makes it possible ‘to ascribe suffering and death on the cross to the divine-human person of Christ. If this divine nature in the person of the eternal Son of God is the centre which creates a person in Christ, then it too suffered and died.’<sup class="calibre6">47</sup></p>
<p class="in">T.F. Torrance likewise believes that the suffering of Christ must be ascribed to his ‘divine-human Person.’ Therefore, ‘what Christ felt, did and suffered in himself in his body and soul for our forgiveness was felt, done, and suffered by God in his innermost Being for our sake.’<sup class="calibre6">48</sup></p>
<p class="in">Moreover, theologians see the misplaced attribute of divine impassibility giving rise to an exaggerated fear of <i class="calibre5">patripassianism</i>, that is, the early church’s concern that not adequately distinguishing the person of the Son from the person of the Father would demand that the Father as <a id="page_17" class="calibre3"></a>well as the Son suffered.<sup class="calibre6">49</sup> However, if one maintains a proper understanding of the Trinity, and so avoids <i class="calibre5">patripassianism</i>, one can nonetheless say that while the Son suffers on the cross, the Father also suffers <i class="calibre5">as the Father</i> in the death of his Son.<sup class="calibre6">50</sup></p>
<p class="in">This leads to the third manner in which the Incarnation and cross bear upon the passibility of God. The cross is not merely the experience of a passible divine Son. The suffering and pain of the cross rather is the experience of both the Father and the Son. Moltmann, who initiated and has most fully developed this point, argues that Jesus’ cry of dereliction upon the cross was not just the cry of a man being abandoned by God nor even the cry of the Son <i class="calibre5">as man</i> experiencing abandonment. Rather the cry of abandonment was the cry of the Son as God experiencing the loss of the Father. The cry of dereliction was a cry being experienced within the very depths of God’s nature.</p>
<p class="bq1">The rejection expressed in his [Jesus’] dying cry, and accurately interpreted by the words of Ps. 22, must therefore be understood strictly as something which took place between Jesus and his Father, and in the other direction between his Father and Jesus, the Son – that is, as something which took place between God and God. The abandonment on the cross which separates the Son from the Father is something which takes place within God himself.<sup class="calibre6">51</sup></p>
<p class="in">On the cross then it is not only the Son who suffers the loss of the Father, it is equally the Father suffering the loss of the Son. ‘In the passion of the Son, the Father himself suffers the pains of abandonment. In the death of the Son, death comes upon God himself, and the Father suffers the death of his Son in his love for forsaken man.’<sup class="calibre6">52</sup> For Moltmann the suffering <a id="page_18" class="calibre3"></a>experienced by the Father and Son, due to the cross, is even formative and constitutive of their being the Father and the Son.<sup class="calibre6">53</sup></p>
<p class="in">Galot agrees that resistance to <i class="calibre5">patripassianism</i> often led in the past to the denial of the Father’s suffering. Nonetheless, while not agreeing with Moltmann that the Father’s suffering is constitutive of the Trinity, he does affirm that the Father does suffer in solidarity with the Son.</p>
<p class="bq1">Only the Son suffers on the Cross, but the Father, a distinct divine person and intimately united to the Son, suffers with him. The Father’s is a suffering of compassion, of exceptional intensity because of their complete oneness …. In the suffering face of the Savior we must also see the suffering face of the Father. Jesus’ human suffering enables us to enter into the mystery of the Father’s divine suffering.<sup class="calibre6">54</sup></p>
<p class="in">What the Old Testament revealed about God then finds its completion in the Incarnation and, especially in the cross. Both reveal that God is indeed passible, and thus the divine Son, within his incarnate state, does suffer as God. Moreover, the cross, and so suffering, reaches into the very depths of the Father’s and the Son’s relationship.</p>
<p class="in">We have now briefly examined the cultural milieu out of which the theology of God’s passibility sprung as well as the biblical evidence that <a id="page_19" class="calibre3"></a>nurtured this theological development. We must now turn to the final factor that contributes to the notion of a passible God – contemporary philosophy.</p>
<p class="sec"><b class="calibre8">From the God of the Greeks to the God of Process</b></p>
<p class="pn">The influence of Greek philosophy, especially Platonism, is the main reason why it has taken almost two thousand years to develop the notion of God’s passibility. <i class="calibre5">All</i> theologians, who advance the idea that God is passible, agree on this judgment. The static, self-sufficient, immutable, and impassible God of Platonic thought hijacked, via Philo and the early church Fathers, the living, personal, active, and passible God of the Bible.</p>
<p class="psec"><i class="calibre5"><b class="calibre9">The Impassible God of Greek Philosophy</b></i></p>
<p class="pn">Philo (c. 20 <small class="calibre10">BC–C</small>. <small class="calibre10">AD</small> 50), the Jewish-Platonic scholar of Alexandria, in attempting to reconcile the Hebrew scriptures with Platonic philosophy, forced the living God of Israel into the procrustean bed of the immutable God of Greek thought. Significantly he is the first to write a treatise entitled <i class="calibre5">Quod deus immutabilis sit (On the Unchangeableness of God</i>).<sup class="calibre6">55</sup></p>
<p class="in">The controlling principle of Platonic theodicy, and its subsequent developments within Middle and Neoplatonic thought, was that God is a completely self-sufficient, all-perfect, transcendent, and unchanging substance. Thus God could not be affected by anything outside himself. He possessed the attribute of impassibility (<i class="calibre5">apatheia</i>) for to be passible (<i class="calibre5">patheia</i>) would mean that he would be under the control of something other than himself in his all-perfect and unchanging reason, and thus manifest weakness, passion, and emotion. As Bauckham writes:</p>
<p class="bq1">For the Greeks, God cannot be passive, he cannot be affected by something else, he cannot (in the broad sense) ‘suffer’ (<i class="calibre5">paschein</i>), because he is absolutely self-sufficient, self-determining and independent.… To be moved by desire or fear or anger is to be affected by something outside the self, instead of being self-determining. Again this is weakness and so God must be devoid of emotion. To suffer or to feel is be subject to pain or emotion and to the things that cause them. God cannot be <i class="calibre5">subject</i> to anything…. Since he is self-sufficient, he cannot be changed. Since he is perfect, he cannot change himself. Thus suffering and emotion are both incompatible with the nature of a God who never becomes, but <i class="calibre5">is</i>.<sup class="calibre6">56</sup></p>
<p class="in"><a id="page_20" class="calibre3"></a>Historically, it is the Greek Platonic notion of God that Christianity practically inherited. The Fathers of the church too uncritically accepted the immutable and impassible God of the Greeks and in so doing distorted the Christian God of revelation. This cancer was transmitted to the Scholastics and thus deformed the whole body of Christian theology.</p>
<p class="in">Thus, while Pollard acknowledges that the Fathers had to make use of the philosophy of their day, yet, in so doing, ‘much that was distinctive in Christianity was either lost or falsely expressed, and alien elements which they imported into Christian thought have cursed theological thought ever since their time.’ This is especially so with regard to God’s impassibility. ‘Brought into the Christian tradition from Greek philosophy, it has brought with it far greater and more serious difficulties than those which it was originally designed to obviate.’<sup class="calibre6">57</sup></p>
<p class="in">Pannenberg is a little more nuanced in his judgment. He denies that the Christian faith was hellenized, as Harnack and Ritschl maintained, but he nonetheless believes that the Greek notion of God’s immutability has retarded and arrested a proper Christian understanding of God and his relation to the world, especially within christology. Divine immutability does not allow adequate scope to the living God’s ‘inner plenitude,’ ‘creative activity,’ ‘freedom,’ ‘spontaneous act,’ and ‘acts in history.’<sup class="calibre6">58</sup></p>
<p class="bq1">In contrast to this, the concept of a God who is by nature immutable necessarily obstructs the theological understanding of his historical action, and it has done so to an extent that can hardly be exaggerated. It indeed constitutes the background for the ideal of the impassibility of God which so fatefully determined the Christology of the early church right down to the theopaschite controversy. Above all, <a id="page_21" class="calibre3"></a>however, the concept of the immutability of God necessarily leads to the consequence that the transition to every innovation in the relationship between God and man has to be sought as much as possible on the side of man. Thus, the idea of God becoming man has to recede into the background behind that of God assuming human nature.<sup class="calibre6">59</sup></p>
<p class="in">Lee argues that Aquinas, in maintaining that God is pure act (<i class="calibre5">actus purus</i>) brings the philosophical principle of God’s impassibility to its logical conclusion. ‘This static notion of divine perfection as the immovable and unchanging Being is based on the idea that in God there is no potentiality or receptivity to be affected from without or actualized from within but is “<i class="calibre5">actus purus</i>”.’<sup class="calibre6">60</sup> Dorner, in his classical critique of divine immutability, argues that, because God is loving and merciful, the traditional understanding of divine immutability must be radically modified. God is not ontologically immutable, but ethically immutable for he possesses a living relationship with the humanity which changes not only humanity but himself as well. ‘Without reciprocity between God and world such vital relations would have no authentic reality.’<sup class="calibre6">61</sup></p>
<p class="in">Because the notion of God which has dominated Christian theology for almost its entire history has been so heavily formed within the foreign mould of Greek philosophy, it is not truly the authentic God of the Bible. Many theologians would then agree with Moltmann’s judgment that ‘the God of theism is poor. He cannot love nor can he suffer.’<sup class="calibre6">62</sup></p>
<p class="psec"><i class="calibre5"><b class="calibre9">The Passible God of Process Theology</b></i></p>
<p class="pn">In response to this inherited tradition of the impassible God, theologians, as we have seen above, have argued for a more living, personal, active, and dynamic God. As Blocher points out: ‘The epithet “static”, which suits Being, has become distinctly pejorative. Dynamically to be on the move now holds supreme value.’<sup class="calibre6">63</sup> Nowhere is this more clearly seen and <a id="page_22" class="calibre3"></a>more consistently, systematically and philosophically proposed than among the process theologians. It is process thought that has given the philosophical and metaphysical impetus to the notion of God’s passibility. This is acknowledged even by those who do not fully subscribe to it.<sup class="calibre6">64</sup> We will therefore briefly outline the process notion of God.</p>
<p class="in">Process theology receives its philosophical inspiration from Whitehead and Hartshorne.<sup class="calibre6">65</sup> Their philosophy grew out of the basic principle that change is the universal element of reality, and so were influenced by such philosophers as Hegel and Leibnitz, and they equally found support from the scientific theory of biological evolution.<sup class="calibre6">66</sup></p>
<p class="in">Consequently, process theologians level similar criticisms against classical theism as the ones we saw above. For them the supernaturalistic notion of God makes him completely unrelated to the world and unconcerned with the cares of this world. Ogden believes that the Greek God inherited by Christianity forces God to be ‘as Camus has charged, the eternal bystander whose back is turned to the woe of the world.’<sup class="calibre6">67</sup> Pittenger argues that because classical theism sees God as all-powerful, almighty and all-perfect, ‘the usual picture has been of an external ruler who pushes, thrusts, twists, and moves his subjects at will, with little or no regard for their own self-realisation. God is a dictator.’<sup class="calibre6">68</sup> Moreover, he is an ‘aloof and distant deity … [the] static Absolute and the all-powerful <a id="page_23" class="calibre3"></a>monarch.’<sup class="calibre6">69</sup> Whitehead concludes that ‘the Church gave unto God the attributes which belonged exclusively to Caesar.’<sup class="calibre6">70</sup></p>
<p class="in">In contrast to the classical notion of God and his relationship to the world, process theologians champion a much more dynamic view of reality and of God within it. Within process theology, the whole cosmos is made up of ‘actual entities’ or ‘actual occasions’ which are moments of experience. Each actual occasion ‘prehends,’ that is, each actual occasion takes into itself previous actual occasions and adds its own new subjective novelty in the prehension. It is this successive prehension of past actual occasions by present ones, who are in turn prehended by future actual occasions, that gives rise to and constitutes the continual creative process of on-going reality. Prehension is what makes reality dynamic and inter-relational. It is within this basic philosophical cosmology that God is grasped and understood. As Whitehead noted: ‘God is not to be treated as an exception to all metaphysical principles, invoked to save their collapse. He is their chief exemplification.’<sup class="calibre6">71</sup></p>
<p class="in">Within process thought God is dipolar, that is, he has a primordial or abstract pole and a consequent or concrete pole. The abstract pole of God is God in his pure potential – not what God actually is, but what God actual could come to be. It gives God the ability to prehend all events and so relate himself to all other actual realities in the world, especially human persons. God is, in his primordial pole, unchangeable and absolute, for he is forever potentially and supremely related to all. Because God can be related to all, all is related to God. As God prehends all, so all else, especially human beings, prehends God. Likewise, since God is all good, he strives to lure, persuade and encourage all reality to fulfil the perfect goodness that potentially lies within him.</p>
<p class="in">God in his concrete pole is God as he actually exists at any given time in the process. Pittenger concludes: ‘Therefore time – or succession as the world exemplifies it – is real to God.’ God constantly changes with each successive prehension of all actual occasions. He ever increases and actualizes his abstract potential in the course of history. Thus, literally, ‘<i class="calibre5">What happens matters to God</i> …. History, historical occurrence in time, are real to him, for him and in him.’<sup class="calibre6">72</sup></p>
<p class="in">Process theologians classify their notion of God as panentheistic, that is, while God is always potentially more, yet as concrete, the world is in God, not in its subjective immediacy, but in its objective past. Griffin states: ‘The world is in God, but only in his experience, not in his essence. Hence God includes everything, but everything is not God.’<sup class="calibre6">73</sup></p>
<p class="in"><a id="page_24" class="calibre3"></a>Process theology admits an easy grasp as to how and why God is passible. He takes into himself all that has happened within the world, and so is not only affected but is also actually constituted by it. Thus, all of the joy, pain and suffering which occurs within the world and the lives of human beings becomes the tangible experiences of God. Hallman writes:</p>
<p class="bq1">On the physical or consequent side, God receives all from the world of change, shares or inherits everything which occurs. Temporal entities inherit their limited pasts from those concrete past entities which precede them; God inherits the totality of past entities. They become the divine experience of the temporal world and are woven together with the conceptual experience of eternal objects which precede concrete experience.<sup class="calibre6">74</sup></p>
<p class="in">Because God’s very being is constituted by the experiences of the world and humankind, he is, according to Hartshorne ‘infinitely passive, the endurer of all change, the adventurer through all novelty, the companion through all vicissitudes.’<sup class="calibre6">75</sup> Whitehead, in his celebrated <a id="page_25" class="calibre3"></a>observation, simply states that God is ‘the greatest companion – the fellow sufferer who understands.’<sup class="calibre6">76</sup></p>
<p class="in">This finds its greatest expression in Jesus. Jesus embodies (prehends) God’s lure or aim for his life most fully and completely (this constitutes him as God’s Son or Logos) and so God, in turn, prehends all of Jesus’ human experiences – all his suffering and even his death on the cross. Jesus, then, is the supreme paradigm of God’s relationship to world and humankind. According to Pittenger, Jesus is ‘the chief exemplification … of those “principles” which are required to explain, make sense of, and give the proper setting for whatever goes on in the entire process of God in relationship to man and man in relation to God.’<sup class="calibre6">77</sup> If Jesus is the chief exemplification, then ‘the Incarnation is not confined only to the historical person of Jesus Christ, but is also the manner and mode of all of God’s work in the world. That is to say, God is ever incarnating himself in his creation.’<sup class="calibre6">78</sup> Thus the relationship between Jesus and God is the same as our relationship with God, and as God participates in the life of Jesus so too does he participate in ours – in all of its joy and suffering.</p>
<p class="in">Despite its very metaphysical nature, process theologians believe that their thought is thoroughly biblical in inspiration and content. It once more captures in a philosophically consistent manner the personal, living, relational, loving and active God of the Bible.</p>
<p class="sec"><b class="calibre8">The Passionate God Who Loves and Acts</b></p>
<p class="pn">I have attempted in this opening chapter to present, as clearly, as objectively, and as strongly as possible, the arguments on behalf of the passibility of God.<sup class="calibre6">79</sup> I have done so primarily through the words of the many advocates themselves. I hope that I have been just to their concerns, thoughts, and arguments.</p>
<p class="in">The arguments presented in this chapter are intellectually and, even more so, emotionally compelling. They possess an earnestness and integrity that is beyond doubt. I, obviously, am in sympathy with many of the concerns they raise and the theological issues they confront and attempt to resolve. Unquestionably God, as revealed in the Bible, is a personal, loving and dynamic God who acts in history and in the lives of human beings. Moreover, he is not indifferent to the horror of Auschwitz, nor to the injustice which inflicts the lives of the oppressed, nor to the sufferings within our own lives. Likewise, the early Fathers did struggle with Greek philosophical thought and not always with complete success.</p>
<p class="in"><a id="page_26" class="calibre3"></a>However, while I want to uphold much of what the theologians in this chapter advocate, I do not believe that one must conclude that God is, therefore, passible. I believe a passible God is actually less personal, loving, dynamic and active than an impassible God. The remainder of this study will attempt to demonstrate this, seemingly, paradoxical thesis.</p>
<p class="ntcon">1  A.M. Fairbairn, <i class="calibre5">The Place of Christ in Modern Theology</i> (New York: Charles Scribner’s Sons, 1893), p. 483.</p>
<p class="ntnlf">2  D.D. Williams, <i class="calibre5">What Present-Day Theologians Are Thinking</i> (New York: Harper &amp; Row, 1952), p. 138.</p>
<p class="ntnlf">3  R. Goetz, ‘The Suffering God: The Rise of a New Orthodoxy,’ <i class="calibre5">The Christian Century</i> 103/13 (1986):385. However, it must be stated that Goetz is not in sympathy with ‘the new orthodoxy.’</p>
<p class="ntnlf">4  M. Sarot, ‘Suffering of Christ, Suffering of God?’, <i class="calibre5">Theology</i> 95 (1992):113. At my count, Sarot has written nine articles and a full-length book in support of divine passibility and suffering.</p>
<p class="ntnlf">5  J. Moltmann, <i class="calibre5">History and the Triune God</i> (London: SCM, 1991), p. xvi.</p>
<p class="ntnlf">6  M. Steen also holds that the passibility of God has arisen ‘under the impulse of three factors, which actually work in convergence.’ They are 1. biblical and christological discourse, 2. the new metaphysical ideas of Process thought, 3. human suffering and the question of God. See M. Steen, ‘The Theme of the “Suffering” God: An Exploration’ in <i class="calibre5">God and Human Suffering</i>, eds J. Lambrecht and R.F. Collins (Louvain: Peeters Press, 1990), pp. 71–78.</p>
<p class="ntnl">P. Fiddes gives four factors: 1. the love of God, 2. The cross of Christ, 3. The problem of human suffering, 4. The world-picture of today. See <i class="calibre5">The Creative Suffering of God</i> (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1988), pp. 16–45.</p>
<p class="ntnl">R. Goetz gives slightly different reasons: 1. the decline of Christendom, 2. the rise of democratic aspirations, 3. the problem of suffering and evil, 4. the critical reappraisal of the Bible. See ‘The Suffering God,’ p. 386.</p>
<p class="ntnl">For almost complete bibliographies on the issue of God’s impassibility or passibility, see M. Sarot, ‘De Passibilitas Dei in de Hedendaagse Westerse Theologie: Een Literatuuroverzicht,’ <i class="calibre5">Kerk en Theologie</i> 40 (1989):196–206, and M. Sarot, <i class="calibre5">God, Passibility and Corporeality</i> (Kampen: Kok Pharos Publishing House, 1992), pp. 246–62. My own bibliography contains titles not found in either of Sarot’s listings. I must admit that I have not read every book and article that advocates a passible God, but as this chapter should demonstrate, I have examined a great deal of the literature. Having read what I have, I am confident that what I have not read does not state anything radically new and different from what I have read.</p>
<p class="ntnl">For an excellent brief survey of the history of, and the arguments for, the passibility of God, see R. Bauckham, ‘“Only the Suffering God Can Help”: Divine Passibility in Modern Theology,’ <i class="calibre5">Themelios</i> 9 (1984:3):6–12. For the broader question of God’s immutability, see S. Sia, ‘The Doctrine of God’s Immutability: Introducing the Modern Debate,’ <i class="calibre5">New Blackfriars</i> 68 (1987):220–32.</p>
<p class="ntnlf">7  P. Ramsey and W.F. May state in their Foreword to A. McGill’s book <i class="calibre5">Suffering: A Test of Theological Method</i> (Philadelphia: Westminster Press, 1982) that ‘suffering poses the fundamental test for theology in our day’ (p. 7).</p>
<p class="ntnlf">8  B.R. Brasnett, <i class="calibre5">The Suffering of the Impassible God</i> (London: SPCK, 1928), p. ix. See also the immensely important and influential work, commissioned by the Archbishops’ Doctrine Commission, of J.K. Mozley, <i class="calibre5">The Impassibility of God: A Survey of Christian Thought</i> (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1926). Besides discussing the entire theological history of God’s impassibility, Mozley also presents those theologians who, in the previous sixty years, had advocated the passibility of God. See pp. 130–66.</p>
<p class="ntnl">R. Bauckham proudly states: ‘For once, English theology can claim to have pioneered a major theological development: from 1890 onwards, a steady stream of English theologians, whose theological approaches differ considerably in other respects, have agreed in advocating, with more or less emphasis, a doctrine of divine suffering’ (’Only the Suffering God Can Help,’ p. 6). Bauckham gives references to the English theologians. See p. 6, fn. 4.</p>
<p class="ntnl">I would like to think, though, that the theological jury is still deliberating on whether or not the passibility of God is a ‘true’ development.</p>
<p class="ntnl">For a defense of the impassibility of God given within the context of the then new drift toward a passible notion of God, see F. von Hügel, ‘Suffering and God,’ in <i class="calibre5">Essays and Addresses on the Philosophy of Religion</i>, second series (London: J.M. Dent &amp; Sons, 1926), pp. 167–213.</p>
<p class="ntnlf">9  Auschwitz has now become this century’s icon, a century indelibly stained by genocide and ‘ethnic cleansing.’ It graphically portrays the radical evil humankind is capable of perpetrating. It depicts the inexpressible monstrous and morally intolerable suffering of the poor, the weak, and the innocent.</p>
<p class="ntull">10  What I have quoted here is actually a summary given by Moltmann of Wiesel’s own account, <i class="calibre5">The Crucified God</i> (London: SCM, 1974), pp. 273–74. Moltmann references E. Wiesel, <i class="calibre5">Night</i> (London: Fontana/Collins, 1972), pp. 76–77.</p>
<p class="ntnl">Sarot notes that Moltmann ‘introduced the story into theology. While suggesting that he quotes Wiesel, Moltmann gives a summary in his own words of Wiesel’s story. Besides, Moltmann suggests that the event that is related happened at Auschwitz, whereas in fact it happened at Buna. Far worse, however, is the fact that Moltmann suggests that Wiesel in the story of the youth on the gallows relates a religious experience of the suffering God’ (’Auschwitz, Morality and the Suffering of God,’ <i class="calibre5">Modern Theology</i> 7/2 (1991):137). Sarot contends that ‘in Buna Wiesel was not comforted by the presence of a suffering God; in Buna Wiesel rebelled against God because he could no longer believe in his justice. For Wiesel, it was not God who died on the gallows – “I did not deny God’s existence” – but his faith in God, his concept of a loving, gentle, just God’ (<i class="calibre5">ibid</i>., p. 138). For Sarot it is therefore inappropriate for Christian theologians to use Wiesel’s story to advocate a Christian notion of a suffering God. ‘<i class="calibre5">In short</i>, it is impossible to defend with integrity the claim that in this story Wiesel relates how he was comforted by the suffering of God. Nor is it possible without presumption to interpret this story as conveying the deeper meaning that what the Jews in Auschwitz needed was the Christian faith’ (<i class="calibre5">ibid</i>., p. 139).</p>
<p class="ntnl">References to Wiesel’s story are too numerous to note them all. J. Vanhoutte states that ‘this account is to be found in at least twenty publications in the domain of pastoral and systematic theology’ (’God as Companion and Fellow-Suffer,’ <i class="calibre5">Arhivio di Filosofia</i> 56, 1–3 (1988):193). Sarot notes that J. Vanhoutte, in another article, lists thirty titles, see ‘Een Thematisch Overzicht van de Recente Literatuur over “God en het Lijden”’ in J. Lambrecht (ed.) <i class="calibre5">Hoelang Nog en Waarom Toch ? God, Mens en Lijden</i> (Leuven/Amersfoort: Acco, 1988), pp. 264–66). I am confident that I found further references to the story of which Sarot and Vanhoutte are unaware. Nonetheless, for a few examples, see B.R. Brinkmann, <i class="calibre5">To the Lengths of God</i> (London: Sheed &amp; Ward, 1988), p. 138; Steen, ‘The Theme of the “Suffering” God,’ p. 77; K. Surin, ‘The Impassibility of God and the Problem of Evil,’ <i class="calibre5">Scottish Journal of Theology</i> 35 (1982):97–115.</p>
<p class="ntull">11  Moltmann, <i class="calibre5">The Crucified God</i>, p. 274.</p>
<p class="ntull">12  Moltmann, <i class="calibre5">History and the Triune God</i>, p. 29. Moltmann also speaks of Auschwitz and his own experience. For example, see <i class="calibre5">The Crucified God</i>, pp. 1, 277–78.</p>
<p class="ntull">13  J. Moltmann, <i class="calibre5">The Trinity and the Kingdom of God</i> (London: SCM, 1981), p. 47. See also pp. 48–49.</p>
<p class="ntull">14  See K. Kitamori, <i class="calibre5">Theology of the Pain of God</i> (London: SCM, 1966), p. 19. See also p. 90.</p>
<p class="ntull">15  J.Y. Lee, <i class="calibre5">God Suffers For Us: A Systematic Inquiry into a Concept of Divine Passibility</i> (The Hague: Martinus Nijhoff, 1974), p. 1.</p>
<p class="ntull">16  See J. Cone, <i class="calibre5">God of the Oppressed</i> (London: SPCK, 1977). Because much of the suffering experienced in the modern world was and is due to social, political, racial, and economic injustice, the theology of the passibility of God, which developed in this milieu, for example that of Moltmann and Cone, is of a political nature, that is, God suffers on behalf of and for the sake of those who are socially, racially, politically, and economically abused. In so doing the suffering God brings about, in some fashion, ‘salvation.’ As W. McWilliams writes: ‘Cone would concur with Moltmann’s judgement that the theodicy issue in our time is political rather than naturalistic, i.e. he focuses on “moral evil” rather than “natural evil”’ (’Divine Suffering in Contemporary Theology.’ <i class="calibre5">Scottish Journal of Theology</i> 33 (1980):39).</p>
<p class="ntnl">Because the suffering of the innocent is so closely tied to political injustice, the suffering of God is also a theme within Liberation Theology. See for example, L. Boff, <i class="calibre5">Passion of Christ, Passion of the World</i> (Maryknoll: Orbis, 1987), pp. 102–16; G. Gutierrez, <i class="calibre5">On Job, God-Talk and the Suffering of the Innocent</i> (Maryknoll: Orbis, 1987); and J. Sobrino, <i class="calibre5">Christology at the Crossroads</i> (London: SCM, 1978), pp. 217–35. For a short exposition of the role that suffering plays in formulating the doctrine of God within Liberation Theology, including that of J.B. Metz, see L. Richard, <i class="calibre5">What Are They Saying About the Theology of Suffering?</i> (New York: Paulist Press, 1992), pp. 58–72, 89–103.</p>
<p class="ntnl">F.J. van Beeck also rightly writes: ‘It would seem to be no coincidence that some of the more creative attempts at reintegrating compassion into the conception of God’s transcendence have come from women theologians.’ ‘“This Weakness of God’s is Stronger” (1 Cor. 1:25): An Inquiry Beyond the Power of Being,’ <i class="calibre5">Toronto Journal of Theology</i> 9/1 (1993):15. He notes: D. Sölle, <i class="calibre5">Suffering</i> (Philadelphia: Fortress Press, 1975); R. Haughton, <i class="calibre5">The Passionate God</i> (New York: Paulist Press, 1981); M. Hellwig, <i class="calibre5">Jesus, the Compassion of God: New Perspectives on the Tradition of Christianity</i> (Wilmington: Michael Glazier, 1983); C.M. LaCugna, ‘The Relational God.’ <i class="calibre5">Theological Studies</i> 46 (1985):647–63. One should also add: G. Jantzen, <i class="calibre5">God’s World, God’s Body</i> (London: Darton, Longman &amp; Todd, 1984) and E. Johnson, <i class="calibre5">She Who Is</i> (New York: Crossroad, 1993). For a short discussion of Sölle’s theology, see Richard, <i class="calibre5">What Are They Saying</i> …? pp. 73–88.</p>
<p class="ntull">17  Steen, ‘The Theme of the “Suffering” God,’ p. 76. Steen quoted J.B. Brantschen, ‘Die Macht und Ohnmacht der Liebe. Randglossen zum dogmatischen Satz: Gott ist unveränderlich,’ <i class="calibre5">Freiburger Zeitschrift für Philosophie und Theologie</i> 27 (1980):226.</p>
<p class="ntull">18  R. Bauckham, ‘In Defence of <i class="calibre5">The Crucified God</i>’ in <i class="calibre5">The Power and Weakness of God</i>, ed. N.M. de S. Cameron (Edinburgh: Rutherford House Books, 1990), p. 96. This article is also re-published in R. Bauckham, <i class="calibre5">The Theology of Jürgen Moltmann</i> (Edinburgh: T &amp; T Clark, 1995), pp. 47–69.</p>
<p class="ntull">19  D. Bonhoeffer, <i class="calibre5">Letters and Papers from Prison</i> (London: SCM, 1967), p. 197.</p>
<p class="ntull">20  For other Old Testament passages that speak of God repenting or changing his mind see, Gen. 6:6–7; Judg. 2:18; 2 Sam. 24:16; 1 Chr. 21:15; Ps. 106:45; Jer. 18:8; Amos 7:3 and 6; Joel 2:13; Jon. 3:10.</p>
<p class="ntnl">These passages are seen by some theologians as expressing God’s unquestionable passibility. He does change his mind and is affected by the intercession of others or by the repentance of his people. See L.J. Kuyper, ‘The Suffering and the Repentance of God,’ <i class="calibre5">Scottish Journal of Theology</i> 22 (1969):257–77.</p>
<p class="ntnl">For an excellent and brief account of the notion of God in the Old Testament, see J.J. Scullion, <i class="calibre5">The Anchor Bible Dictionary</i>, Vol. 2, ed. D.N. Friedman (New York: Doubleday, 1992), pp. 1041–48.</p>
<p class="ntull">21  Steen, ‘The Theme of the “Suffering” God,’ pp. 71–72. K.J. Clark also expresses this sentiment well: ‘While the Scriptural record can be made to fit the hypothesis of divine impassibility, the fit is at best forced and unnatural. There is a certain naturalness of the passibilist interpretation given Scripture. For the Christian philosophical theologian, one must always think with Scripture in the background.’ ‘Hold not Thy Peace at My Tears: Methodological Reflection on Divine Impassibility’ in <i class="calibre5">Our Knowledge of God</i>, ed. K.J. Clark (Dordrecht: Klewer Academic Press, 1992), p. 186.</p>
<p class="ntnl">See also L. Kolakowski, <i class="calibre5">Metaphysical Horror</i> (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1988), pp. 87–91; H. Küng, <i class="calibre5">The Incarnation of God</i> (New York: Crossroad, 1987), pp. 533–37; J. Lucas, <i class="calibre5">The Future</i> (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1989), pp. 214–15; C. Pinnock, ‘The Need for a Scriptural, and Therefore a Neo-Classical Theism’ in <i class="calibre5">Perspectives on Evangelical Theology</i>, eds K. Kantzer and S. Gundry (Grand Rapids: Baker, 1979), pp. 37–42; C. Pinnock, R. Rice, J. Sanders, W. Hasker, D. Basinger, <i class="calibre5">The Openness of God: A Biblical Challenge to the Traditional Understanding of God</i> (Carlisle: The Paternoster Press, 1994), pp. 11–38; Richard, <i class="calibre5">What Are They Saying …?</i> pp. 11–22; R. Swinburne, <i class="calibre5">The Coherence of Theism: Revised Edition</i> (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1993), pp. 219–29.</p>
<p class="ntull">22  van Beeck, ‘This Weakness of God’s is Stronger,’ p. 13.</p>
<p class="ntull">23  See A. Heschel, <i class="calibre5">The Prophets</i> (New York: Harper &amp; Row, 1962). For examples of Heschel’s influence on other theologians, see Bauckham, ‘Only the Suffering God Can Help,’ pp. 9–10; Lee, <i class="calibre5">God Suffers for Us</i>, p. 12; Moltmann, <i class="calibre5">The Crucified God</i>, pp. 270–73; <i class="calibre5">The Trinity and the Kingdom of God</i>, pp. 25–30; K. Ward, <i class="calibre5">Religion and Creation</i> (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1996), pp. 19–24.</p>
<p class="ntull">24  Fiddes, <i class="calibre5">The Creative Suffering of God</i>, p. 20.</p>
<p class="ntull">25  For a thorough examination of the suffering of God in the Old Testament see, T.E. Fretheim, <i class="calibre5">The Suffering of God: An Old Testament Perspective</i> (Philadelphia: Fortress Press, 1984). See also E. Jacob, ‘Le Dieu souffrant, un thème théologique vétérotesta-mentaire,’ <i class="calibre5">Zeitschrift für die Alttestamentliche Wissenschaft</i> 95 (1983):1–8.</p>
<p class="ntnl">Fretheim argues that the anthropomorphic language in the Old Testament must be interpreted in accordance with the metaphor being used. ‘The metaphors do reveal an essential continuity with the reality which is God’ (p. 7). They are ‘reality depicting.’ Thus the Old Testament metaphors must be interpreted ‘along the metaphorical grain’ and not contrary to it. ‘If one moves against the natural implication of the metaphor, one is misinterpreting it’ (p. 8). Thus the metaphors and anthropomorphic language that depict the passibility and suffering of God must be interpreted in accordance with that grain and not against it.</p>
<p class="ntnl">Fretheim has also discussed the suffering of God and his passible nature within the Old Testament in the following articles: ‘Divine Foreknowledge, Divine Constancy and the Rejection of Saul’s Kingship,’ <i class="calibre5">Catholic Biblical Quarterly</i> 47 (1985):595–602; ‘The Repentance of God: A Study of Jeremiah 18:7–10,’ <i class="calibre5">Hebrew Annual Review</i> 11 (1987): 81–92; ‘The Repentance of God: A Key to Evaluating Old Testament God-Talk,’ <i class="calibre5">Horizons in Biblical Theology</i> 10 (1988):47–70; ‘Suffering God and Sovereign God in Exodus,’ <i class="calibre5">Horizons in Biblical Theology</i> 11 (1989):31–56.</p>
<p class="ntnl">D.J. Hall states that the basic aim of his study is to give ‘a reasoned elaboration … that the response to human suffering coming out of the tradition of Jerusalem is nothing less than the suffering of God.’ <i class="calibre5">God and Human Suffering: An Exercise in the Theology of the Cross</i> (Minneapolis: Augsburg, 1986), p. 16. See especially pp. 93–121.</p>
<p class="ntull">26  Lee, <i class="calibre5">God Suffers for Us</i>, p. 19. See also pp. 6–22.</p>
<p class="ntull">27  Moltmann, <i class="calibre5">The Crucified God</i>, p. 230. See also p. 222.</p>
<p class="ntull">28  Moltmann, <i class="calibre5">The Trinity and the Kingdom of God</i>, p. 38. See also pp. 21–60. See also <i class="calibre5">History and the Triune God</i>, pp. 29, 123.</p>
<p class="ntull">29  Fiddes, <i class="calibre5">The Creative Suffering of God</i>, p. 17. T. Johannes Van Bavel argues in a similar vein. ‘If God is love, then he must be involvement at its highest. If he is such, it is not odd that he is affected by human suffering, and that he shares in the legitimate joys and the suffering of innocent people.’ ‘Where is God When Human Beings Suffer?’ in <i class="calibre5">God and Human Suffering</i>, p. 149.</p>
<p class="ntnl">For a critique of Augustine’s view of God and the necessity for God to suffer because he loves, see also N. Wolterstorff, ‘Suffering Love’ in <i class="calibre5">Philosophy and the Christian Faith</i>, ed. T.V. Morris (Notre Dame: University of Notre Dame Press, 1988), pp. 196–237.</p>
<p class="ntnl">See also Bauckham, ‘Only the Suffering God Can Help,’ p. 10.</p>
<p class="ntull">30  F. Varillon, <i class="calibre5">La Souffrance de Dieu</i> (Paris: Le Centurion, 1975), p. 14.</p>
<p class="ntull">31  J. Galot, <i class="calibre5">Dieu Souffre-t-il?</i> (Paris: Editions P. Lethielleux, 1976), p. 172. See also pp. 212–14. For another more traditional theologian who also advocates the passibility of God, see T.F. Torrance, <i class="calibre5">The Christian Doctrine of God: One Being Three Persons</i> (Edinburgh: T &amp; T Clark, 1996), pp. 235–56.</p>
<p class="ntnl">For other authors, besides those already referred to, who hold that love demands that God suffer, see: E. Burnley, ‘The Impassibility of God,’ <i class="calibre5">The Expository Times</i> 67 (1955–56):90–91; B.P. Gaybba, ‘God As Love’ in <i class="calibre5">God and Temporality</i>, eds B.L. Clarke and E.T. Long (New York: Paragon House, 1984), pp. 15–35; L. Gillet, ‘Le Dieu Souffrant,’ <i class="calibre5">Contacts</i> 17 (1965):239–54; C. Grant, ‘Possibilities for Divine Passibility,’ <i class="calibre5">Toronto Journal of Theology</i> 4/1 (1988):8–14; F. House, ‘The Barrier of Impassibility,’ <i class="calibre5">Theology</i> 83 (1980):409–15; D.E. Jenkins, <i class="calibre5">Still Living with Questions</i> (London: SCM, 1990), pp. 15–27; J. Kamp, ‘Présence du Dieu Souffrant,’ <i class="calibre5">Lumière et Vie</i> 25 (1976):54–66; G. MacGregor, <i class="calibre5">He Who Lets Us Be: A Theology of Love</i> (New York: Seabury Press, 1975); H. Wheeler Robinson, <i class="calibre5">Suffering Human and Divine</i> (New York: Macmillan, 1939), pp. 155–56; K. Surin, ‘Theodicy?’, <i class="calibre5">Harvard Theological Review</i> 76 (1983):225–47; K. Surin, ‘The Impassibility of God and the Problem of Evil,’ <i class="calibre5">Scottish Journal of Theology</i> 35 (1982):97–115; W.H. Vanstone, <i class="calibre5">Love’s Endeavour, Love’s Expense</i> (London: Darton, Longman &amp; Todd, 1977).</p>
<p class="ntnl">Sarot rightly notes that Surin has modified his position. ‘He [Surin] still thinks that God should be concerned about the travails of his creatures, but he now is inclined to think that his having this concern does not require us to say that he is a co-sufferer.’ ‘Auschwitz, Morality and God’s Suffering,’ <i class="calibre5">Modern Theology</i> 7/2 (1991):151, fn. 26). See also <i class="calibre5">ibid</i>., p. 150, fn. 4. See K. Surin, <i class="calibre5">Theology and the Problem of Evil</i> (Oxford: Basil Blackwell, 1986).</p>
<p class="ntnl">Sarot strongly argues as well that only the suffering love of God gives comfort to those who suffer. God’s co-suffering with human beings ‘opposes the de-humanizing influence of suffering and reinforces the self-esteem of the sufferer.’ Moreover, co-suffering ‘transforms the suffering from something entirely negative, humiliating and degrading into an in itself unpleasant experience which nevertheless contains the possibility of establishing and deepening fellowship.’ ‘Divine Suffering: Continuity and Discontinuity with the Tradition,’ <i class="calibre5">Anglican Theological Review</i> 78/2 (1996):232. See also ‘Divine Compassion and the Meaning of Life,’ <i class="calibre5">Scottish Journal of Theology</i> 48/2 (1995):162–65 and ‘Pastoral Counseling and the Compassionate God,’ <i class="calibre5">Pastoral Psychology</i> 43 (1995):185–90.</p>
<p class="ntull">32  Despite the fact that many theologians do so, Sarot holds that it is false to argue that, because there is suffering in the world, God, therefore, has a moral obligation to suffer. He believes that one could still argue that God is impassible even though there is human suffering. Rather, he believes that God’s suffering must be founded upon his love. Because God is a God of love, he freely embraces the suffering of humankind. See ‘Auschwitz, Morality and the Suffering of God,’ <i class="calibre5">Modern Theology</i> 7/2 (1991):141–49; <i class="calibre5">God, Passibility and Corporeality</i>, pp. 80–91, 96–102.</p>
<p class="ntull">33  Steen, ‘The Theme of the “Suffering” God,’ p. 80.</p>
<p class="ntull">34  Moltmann, <i class="calibre5">The Trinity and the Kingdom of God</i>, p. 23. See also <i class="calibre5">The Crucified God</i>, p. 230.</p>
<p class="ntull">35  See W. Pannenberg, ‘The Appropriation of the Philosophical Concept of God as a Dogmatic Problem of Early Christian Theology’ in <i class="calibre5">Basic Questions in Theology</i>, Vol. 1 (London: SCM, 1971), p. 161.</p>
<p class="ntull">36  Ward, <i class="calibre5">Religion and Creation</i>, pp. 249–50. See also pp. 243–55.</p>
<p class="ntull">37  Johnson, <i class="calibre5">She Who Is</i>, p. 266. See also pp. 224–45, 265–70.</p>
<p class="ntull">38  Galot, <i class="calibre5">Dieu Souffre-t-il?</i>, p. 154. See also p. 155. Throughout his works Galot argues that while God is passible within his freely committed relations to human beings, he does not believe that this passibility disturbs his immutable and impassible ‘inner’ divine being.</p>
<p class="bq1f">Une distinction doit être reconnue en Dieu entre l’ètre divin, qu’on peut appeler être nécessaire, et l’attitude adoptée envers l’humanité, où s’exprime la liberté et la gratuite des decisions divines. Vouloir les identifier, ce serait confondre avec l’ètre nécessaire ce qui est libre engagement. En raison de la distinction entre être divin et initiative gratuite, on comprend la distinction qui doit demeurer entre d’une part l’immutabilité et l’impassibilité de la nature divine, et d’autre part l’engagement dans de libres relations OU se produit la souffrance. L’affirmation de la souffrance divine n’empêche donc pas de maintenir Ie principe de l’impassibilité. ‘Le Mystere de la Souffrance de Dieu,’ <i class="calibre5">Esprit et Vie</i> 100 (1990):265. See also pp. 261–68.</p>
<p class="ntnl">See also ‘La Réalité de la Souffrance de Dieu,’ <i class="calibre5">Nouvelle Revue Theologique</i> 101 (1979):224–45; ‘Le Dieu Trinitaire et la Passion du Christ,’ <i class="calibre5">Nouvelle Revue Theologique</i> 104 (1982):70–87; and ‘La Révélation de la Souffrance de Dieu,’ <i class="calibre5">Science et Esprit</i> 31 (1979):159–71; <i class="calibre5">Père, qui es-Tu?</i> (Versailles: Éditions Saint-Paul, 1996, pp. 77–79; and <i class="calibre5">Notre Père qui est Amour</i> (Saint-Maur: Parole et Silence, 1998) pp. 110–12.</p>
<p class="ntnl">A. Torrance believes that it is wrong to predicate suffering of God as if it were a necessary attribute of his being. Rather the suffering of God must be seen ‘as a free act of love.’ This he believes is in keeping with the thought of Barth, Moltmann, and Jüngel. See ‘Does God Suffer? Incarnation and Impassibility’ in <i class="calibre5">Christ in Our Place</i>, eds T. Hart and D. Thimell (Exeter: Paternoster Press, 1987), pp. 364–68.</p>
<p class="ntnl">It is impossible here to give a complete exposition of K. Barth’s and E. Jüngel’s thinking on divine mutability and passibility. Both strongly hold that our view of God cannot be predicated upon some preconceived philosophical position, but must be founded upon the event of God’s revelation. Thus our notion of God must be thoroughly biblical. From this biblical perspective, Barth argues that God, in the vitality of his life and freedom, engages himself as Creator and Saviour, and thus he freely allows himself to be affected by such an engagement (see <i class="calibre5">Church Dogmatics</i> II/1 (Edinburgh: T &amp; T Clark, 1957), pp. 495–99). If God were immutable, as traditionally understood, this would deny that God could participate in the created order and that the created order could participate in his divine life (see p. 501). If God is ‘the pure <i class="calibre5">immobile</i>, it is quite impossible that there should be any relationship between himself and a reality distinct from himself – or at any rate a relationship that is more than the relation of pure mutual negativity, and includes God’s concern for this other reality …. For we must not make any mistake: the pure <i class="calibre5">immobile</i> is – death. If, then, the pure <i class="calibre5">immobile</i> is God, death is God’ (p. 494). God is immutable in the sense that he is constantly faithful to who he is as the living God of love. ‘The immutable is the fact that this God is as the One he is, gracious and holy, merciful and righteous, patient and wise. The immutable is the fact that he is the Creator, Reconciler, Redeemer and Lord. This immutability includes rather than excludes life’ (p. 495). Within the Bible ‘God is certainly the immutable, but as the immutable he is the living God and he possesses a mobility and elasticity which is no less divine than his perseverance’ (p. 496). See pp. 490–51. Thus J.M. Russell believes that Barth holds that God is impassible in the sense that he cannot, by necessity, be acted upon from without and, therefore, that he does not have ‘sensational’ passibility, that is, he is not liable to pleasure and pain caused by the action of another being. Nonetheless, Barth does propose that God possesses ‘internal’ passibility in that he can freely engage himself in the created order and in so doing he can freely change his emotions from within. See ‘Impassibility and Pathos in Barth’s Idea of God,’ <i class="calibre5">Anglican Theological Review</i> 60/3 (1988):221–32. Scholars hold conflicting opinions as to what extent and degree Barth holds that God is passible. See Fiddes, <i class="calibre5">The Creative Suffering of God</i>, pp. 114–23; W. Loewe, ‘Two Theologians of the Cross: Karl Barth and Jürgen Moltmann,’ <i class="calibre5">The Thomist</i> 41/4 (1977):510–39; and M. Steen, ‘Jürgen Moltmann’s Critical Reception of K. Barth’s Theopaschitism,’ <i class="calibre5">Ephemerides Theolgicae Lovanienses</i> 67/4 (1991):278–311.</p>
<p class="ntnl">E. Jüngel argues that, because God is loving and so vulnerable, he freely associates himself with human sinfulness and weakness, and so suffers. See <i class="calibre5">The Doctrine of the Trinity: God’s Being is in Becoming</i> (Grand Rapids: Eerdmans, 1976), pp. 83–88; <i class="calibre5">God as the Mystery of the World: On the Foundation of the Theology of the Crucified One in the Dispute Between Theism and Atheism</i> (Edinburgh: T &amp; T Clark, 1983), pp. 184–225, 314–30; ‘Humanity in Correspondence to God’ in <i class="calibre5">Theological Essays</i> (Edinburgh: T &amp; T Clark, 1989), p. 144. See also J. Webster, <i class="calibre5">Eberhard Jüngel: An Introduction to His Theology</i> (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1986), pp. 20–22, 63–78.</p>
<p class="ntnl">For further discussions of Barth and/or Jüngel, see also Fiddes, <i class="calibre5">The Creative Suffering of God</i>, especially pp. 67–71, 114–23, 198–200, 210–25; Küng, <i class="calibre5">The Incarnation of God</i>, pp. 544–52; E.P. Meijering, <i class="calibre5">God Being History</i> (Amsterdam: North-Holland Publishing Company, 1974), pp. 149–51; and H.U. von Balthasar, <i class="calibre5">Theo-Drama V: The Last Act</i> (San Francisco: Ignatius Press, 1998), pp. 240–43.</p>
<p class="ntnl">Again, this is not the place to present H.U. von Balthasar’s entire thought on divine impassibility and passibility. Yet, it should be noted here that, while he wishes to uphold the immutability and impassibility of God in himself, he also argues that, because of God’s free and loving engagement with the world, he can be said to be mutable and passible in his relationship to the created order. His perfect immutable love allows him to be affected by the created order and so respond to it. Von Balthasar wishes to steer a position between the mythological notion of God’s action in the world as, he believes, is found in Hegel, Moltmann, process theologians and others, and that of the traditional position, as found in Aquinas, where God appears to be disengaged from the vicissitudes of human life. He writes:</p>
<p class="bq1f">Accordingly, there is only one way to approach the trinitarian life in God: on the basis of what is manifest in God’s kenosis in the theology of the covenant – and thence in the theology of the Cross – we must feel our way back into the mystery of the absolute, employing a negative theology that excludes from God all intramundane experience and suffering, while at the same time presupposing that the possibility of such experience and suffering – up to and including its christological and trinitarian implications – is grounded in God. To think in such a way is to walk on a knife edge: it avoids all the fashionable talk of ‘the pain of God’ and yet is bound to say that something happens in God that not only justifies the possibility and actual occurrence of all suffering in the world but also justifies God’s sharing in the latter, in which he goes to the length of vicariously taking on man’s Godlessness (<i class="calibre5">Theo-Drama IV: The Action</i> (San Francisco: Ignatius Press, 1994), p. 324).</p>
<p class="ntnl">For a further discussion of these issues in the context of an exposition and critique of some of the major contemporary theologians who espouse a passible God see his <i class="calibre5">Theo-Drama V</i>, pp. 216–50.</p>
<p class="ntnl">For a good exposition on how von Balthasar attempts to reconcile all of his concerns, see G.F. O’Hanlon, ‘Does God Change? H.U. von Balthasar and the Immutability of God,’ <i class="calibre5">The Irish Theological Quarterly</i> 53 (1987):161–83; and his <i class="calibre5">The Immutability of God in the Theology of Hans Urs Von Balthasar</i> (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press: 1990), especially pp. 110–44. See also T.R. Krenski, <i class="calibre5">Passio Caritatis. Trinitarische Passiologie im Werk Hans Urs von Balthasar</i> (Freiburg: Johannes Verlag, 1990), pp. 348–61; S. Lösel, ‘Murder in the Cathedral: Hans Urs von Balthasar’s New Dramatization of the Doctrine of the Trinity,’ <i class="calibre5">Pro Ecclesia</i> 5/4 (1996):427–39; and M. Ouellet, ‘The Message of Balthasar’s Theology to Modern Theology,’ <i class="calibre5">Communio</i> 23 (1996):286–99.</p>
<p class="ntnl">For other authors who hold that God willingly makes himself vulnerable to suffering out of love, see Bauckham, ‘Only the Suffering God Can Help,’ pp. 7–8; Brasnett, <i class="calibre5">The Suffering of the Impassible God</i>, p. 12; R. Cantalamessa, <i class="calibre5">The Power of the Cross</i> (London: Darton, Longman &amp; Todd, 1996), pp. 114–16; I.A. Dorner, <i class="calibre5">Divine Immutability: A Critical Reconsideration</i> (Minneapolis: Fortress Press, 1994), pp. 161–95; Lee, <i class="calibre5">God Suffers for Us</i>, pp. 10, 12, 41, 44; J. Macquarrie, <i class="calibre5">In Search of Deity: An Essay in Dialectical Theism</i> (London: SCM, 1984), pp. 179–80; Mozley, <i class="calibre5">The Impassibility of God</i>, pp. 145, 152–53, 163; C. Taliaferro, ‘The Passibility of God,’ <i class="calibre5">Religious Studies</i> 25/2 (1989):217–24.</p>
<p class="ntull">39  T.E. Pollard, ‘The Impassibility of God,’ <i class="calibre5">Scottish Journal of Theology</i> 8 (1955):360.</p>
<p class="ntull">40  R. Creel, <i class="calibre5">Divine Impassibility</i> (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1986), p. 2.</p>
<p class="ntull">41  Lee, <i class="calibre5">God Suffers for Us</i>, p. 56. See also, pp. 52–55. On the importance of the Incarnation for revealing a suffering God, see also S. Bulgakov, <i class="calibre5">Agniec Bozij</i> (Paris: YMCA Press, 1933), published in French as <i class="calibre5">Du Verbe Incarné</i> (Paris: Aubier, 1943); W. Hryniewicz, ‘Le Dieu Souffrant?: Réflexions sur la notion chrétienne de Dieu,’ <i class="calibre5">Eglise et Théologie</i> 12 (1981):333–56; H. Mühlen, <i class="calibre5">Die Veränderlichkeit Gottes als Horizont einer zukünftigen Christologie</i> (Münster: Aschendorff, 1969). Hryniewicz stresses the paradoxes that must be held within the nature of God, for example, his transcendence and yet his ability to suffer.</p>
<p class="ntull">42  Fiddes, <i class="calibre5">The Creative Suffering of God</i>, p. 31. Lee states that ‘The Cross of Calvary <i class="calibre5">always</i> points to the eternal Cross.’ <i class="calibre5">God Suffers for Us</i>, p. 59.</p>
<p class="ntnl">Brasnett also writes: ‘We agree with those who would see in the Incarnation a revealing glimpse of the life of God; a manifestation, if we like to put it so, in time and space of the eternal life of Deity. And as there was pain for God in the Incarnation, so we hold there is pain for God when not incarnate.’ <i class="calibre5">The Suffering of the Impassible God</i>, p. 36.</p>
<p class="ntull">43  Moltmann, <i class="calibre5">The Trinity and the Kingdom of God</i>, p. 32. He also states that ‘When the crucified Jesus is called the “image of the invisible God”, the meaning is that <i class="calibre5">this</i> is God, and God is like <i class="calibre5">this</i>. God is not greater than he is in this humiliation.’ <i class="calibre5">The Crucified God</i>, p. 205.</p>
<p class="ntull">44  Jüngel, <i class="calibre5">God as the Mystery of the World</i>, p. 373.</p>
<p class="ntull">45  See Brasnett, <i class="calibre5">The Suffering of the Impassible God</i>, p. 38; Fiddes, <i class="calibre5">The Creative Suffering of God</i>, pp. 26–28; Moltmann, <i class="calibre5">The Crucified God</i>, pp. 227–35.</p>
<p class="ntull">46  Pollard, ‘The Impassibility of God,’ p. 363. See also pp. 361–62. See also B. Vawter, <i class="calibre5">This Man Jesus</i> (London: Geoffrey Chapman, 1975), pp. 145–71.</p>
<p class="ntull">47  Moltmann, <i class="calibre5">The Crucified God</i>, p. 234. Moltmann is here following Luther’s christological position. See pp. 232–34. Brasnett as far back as 1928 expressed a similar view. ‘On our own view (to express ourselves in terms of the orthodox theology) both natures suffered; suffering smote upon the one Person in his humanity and in his Deity.’ <i class="calibre5">The Suffering of the Impassible God</i>, p. 38.</p>
<p class="ntull">48  T.F. Torrance, <i class="calibre5">The Christian Doctrine of God</i>, pp. 247, 249. See also p. 252. See also D.G. Attfield, ‘Can God Be Crucified? A Discussion of J. Moltmann,’ <i class="calibre5">Scottish Journal of Theology</i> 30 (1977):47–56; M. Deneken, ‘God at the Heart of Hell: From Theodicy to the Word of the Cross’ in <i class="calibre5">Concilium: The Spectre of Mass Death</i>, eds N. Power and F.K. Lumbala (London: SPCK, 1993), pp. 52–64; Wheeler Robinson, <i class="calibre5">Suffering Human and Divine</i>, pp. 156–59, 163–84; A. Torrance, ‘Does God Suffer? Incarnation and Impassibility’, pp. 345–68.</p>
<p class="ntnl">Some authors cite G. Vann as an example of someone who espouses the suffering of God as God within the Incarnation, for example, Sarot. However, Vann actually holds the traditional view that the Son of God actually does suffer as man, but that he does not suffer as God. While God does not suffer within his divine nature, Vann does emphasize that the suffering of Jesus reveals the immense pity and compassion which God has for humankind. See <i class="calibre5">The Pain of Christ and the Sorrow of God</i> (London: Blackfriars, 1947), pp. 62–79.</p>
<p class="ntnl">Sarot maintains that there are actually two arguments for the passibility of God stemming from the Incarnation. The first is founded upon the traditional understanding of the Incarnation. If the Son of God actually became man, then when the humanity suffers so too does the divinity. Nonetheless, Sarot believes that the traditional argument that the Son only suffers as man and not as God could be maintained. He therefore prefers the second argument, that is, ‘the suffering of Christ reveals to us the suffering and therewith the passibility of God. This argument does not presuppose the reality of the Incarnation; it works just as well when one holds that Christ was a human being and nothing more than that. It presupposes something else, something which – just like the reality of the Incarnation – is deeply rooted in the Christian faith: that Christ is the ultimate and most perfect revelation of God’ (’Suffering of Christ, Suffering of God?’, <i class="calibre5">Theology</i> 95 (1992):116).</p>
<p class="ntnl">Moreover, if one accepts this second argument, that Christ’s suffering reveals the suffering of the Father, then ‘we therewith leave behind us the problem of how the impassible Logos may have suffered during the Incarnation. If the Father is passible, the Logos will be passible as well. This means that, in that case, we may still accept the rationality of the doctrine of the <i class="calibre5">communicatio idiomatum</i>, but we will have no need for it any more’ (<i class="calibre5">ibid</i>., p. 118). Sarot argues in a similar fashion in <i class="calibre5">God, Passibility and Corporeality</i>, pp. 91–96, and in ‘Divine Suffering: Continuity and Discontinuity with the Tradition,’ <i class="calibre5">Anglican Theological Review</i> 78/2 (1996):233–34.</p>
<p class="ntull">49  J.Y. Lee holds that resistance to <i class="calibre5">patripassianism</i> actually gave rise to the two-nature model of the Incarnation. Since the Father could not suffer, then the Son, who was also God, could not suffer. Thus a distinction had to be made between the divine nature in Christ, which could not suffer, and the human nature of Christ which could suffer. See <i class="calibre5">God Suffers for Us</i>, pp. 36–38.</p>
<p class="ntnl">Sarot is not always happy with how those who advocate the passibility and suffering of God use such terms as ‘patripassianism’ and ‘theopaschitism.’ He attempts to clarify, and so limit, the use of such terms. See ‘Patripassianism, Theopaschitism and the Suffering of God: Some Historical and Systematic Considerations,’ <i class="calibre5">Religious Studies</i> 26 (1990):363–75.</p>
<p class="ntull">50  See Moltmann, <i class="calibre5">The Crucified God</i>, p. 243. See also Fiddes, <i class="calibre5">The Creative Suffering of God</i> were he comments on Moltmann’s understanding of <i class="calibre5">patripassianism</i>, pp. 196–98. See also J.J. O’Donnell, <i class="calibre5">Trinity and Temporality</i> (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1983), pp. 49–50, and Pollard, ‘The Impassibility of God,’ pp. 358–59.</p>
<p class="ntnl">B.P. Gaybba holds that the Christian belief that God suffered for us was ‘effectively anesthetized by affirming that he [the Son] suffered only in his human nature. Within the divinity he experienced no suffering. Christians also held that the Father experienced no suffering. But if the Father did not pay any personal price in sending us his Son, and if the Son did not really, as a divine person, experience pain, rejection, and crucifixion, then the Christian praise of such great love on God’s part is nonsense.’ ‘God As Love’ in <i class="calibre5">God and Temporality</i>, p. 25.</p>
<p class="ntull">51  Moltmann, <i class="calibre5">The Crucified God</i>, pp. 151–52.</p>
<p class="ntull">52  Moltmann, <i class="calibre5">The Crucified God</i>, p. 192. See also <i class="calibre5">History and the Triune God</i>, pp. 51, 47, 172. In <i class="calibre5">The Way of Jesus Christ</i> (London: SCM, 1990) Moltmann states:</p>
<p class="bq1f">Yet here we have to make a clear distinction: in the surrender of the Son the Father surrenders himself too – but not in the same way. The Son suffers his dying in this forsakenness. The Father suffers the death of the Son. He suffers it in the infinite pain of his love for the Son. The death of the Son therefore corresponds to the pain of the Father. And when in this descent into hell the Son loses sight of the Father, then in this judgement the Father also loses sight of the Son. Here what is at stake is the divine consistency, the inner life of the Trinity. Here the self-communicating love of the Father becomes infinite pain over the death of the Son. Here the responding love of the Son turns into infinite suffering over his forsakenness by the Father. What happens on Golgotha reaches into the very depths of the Godhead and therefore puts its impress on the trinitarian life of God in eternity. In Christian faith the cross is always at the centre of the Trinity, for the cross reveals the heart of the triune God, which beats for his whole creation (p. 173).</p>
<p class="ntull">53  See <i class="calibre5">The Crucified God</i>, pp. 244–47. Moltmann also states:</p>
<p class="bq1f">To understand what happened between Jesus and his God and Father on the cross, it is necessary to talk in trinitarian terms. The Son suffers dying, the Father suffers the death of the Son. The grief of the Father here is just as important as the death of the Son. The Fatherlessness of the Son is matched by the Sonlessness of the Father, and if God has constituted himself as the Father of Jesus Christ, then he also suffers the death of his Fatherhood in the death of the Son. Unless this were so, the doctrine of the Trinity would still have a monotheistic background (p. 242).</p>
<p class="ntnl">For a clear exposition and defense of Moltmann’s position see Bauckham, ‘In Defence of <i class="calibre5">The Crucified God</i>,’ pp. 93–118. See also his ‘Only the Suffering God Can Help,’ pp. 11–12, and Richard, <i class="calibre5">What Are They Saying</i> …? pp. 42–57.</p>
<p class="ntull">54  J. Galot, <i class="calibre5">Abba, Father</i> (New York: Alba House, 1992), pp. 138–39. See also p. 140. Galot develops his notion of the suffering of the Father in union with the crucified Son in <i class="calibre5">Dieu Souffre-t-il?</i>, pp. 63–137. For his critique of Moltmann see ‘Le Dieu Trinitaire et la Passion du Christ,’ <i class="calibre5">Nouvelle Revue Théologique</i> 104 (1982):70–87.</p>
<p class="ntnl">For the notion that the Father suffers with Christ on the cross see also T.F. Torrance, <i class="calibre5">The Christian Doctrine of God</i>, pp. 252–53, and A. Torrance, ‘Does God Suffer? Incarnation and Impassibility’, pp. 345–68.</p>
<p class="ntnl">It can also be noted that the Russian theologian N. Berdyaev believes that the cross brings suffering to God. For a short summary of his thought see K.J. Woollcombe, ‘The Pain of God,’ <i class="calibre5">Scottish Journal of Theology</i> 20 (1967):133–35.</p>
<p class="ntull">55  For comments and critiques of Philo, see Bauckham, ‘Only the Suffering God Can Help,’ p. 7; J. Hallman, <i class="calibre5">The Descent of God: Divine Suffering in History and Theology</i> (Minneapolis: Fortress Press, 1991), pp. 23–29; Pannenberg, <i class="calibre5">Basic Questions in Theology</i>, Vol. 1, p. 167; Pollard, ‘The Impassibility of God,’ p. 356; J. Sanders, <i class="calibre5">The Openness of God</i>, pp. 69–72.</p>
<p class="ntull">56  Bauckham, ‘Only the Suffering God Can Help.’ pp. 7–8. Fiddes, commenting on the Greek notion of God, states: ‘Goa as Absolute Being, either at the top of the pyramid or beyond it altogether (depending upon the particular school of Platonism in vogue), must therefore be absolutely unmoving, unchanging, and unaffected by the world of Becoming.’ <i class="calibre5">The Creative Suffering of God</i>, p. 37.</p>
<p class="ntnl">For similar assessments of Greek Platonic theodicy, see C. Cain, ‘A Passionate God?’, <i class="calibre5">Saint Luke’s Journal of Theology</i> 25 (1981):52–57; K.J. Clark, ‘Hold not Thy Peace at My Tears,’ pp. 178–80; Deneken, ‘God at the Heart of Hell,’ pp. 57–58; Dorner, <i class="calibre5">Divine Immutability</i>, pp. 82–130; Rem B. Edwards, ‘The Pagan Dogma of the Absolute Unchangeableness of God,’ <i class="calibre5">Religious Studies</i> 14 (1978):305–13; C. Grant, ‘Possibilities for Divine Passibility,’ <i class="calibre5">Toronto Journal of Theology</i> 4/1 (1988):6–8; Küng, <i class="calibre5">The Incarnation of God</i>, pp. 518–25; Lee, <i class="calibre5">God Suffers for Us</i>, pp. 28–32, 40; W. Maas, <i class="calibre5">Unveränderlichkeit Gottes: Zum Verhältnis von griechisch-philosophischer und christlicher Gotteslehre</i> (München: Schönigh, 1974); Moltmann, <i class="calibre5">The Crucified God</i>, pp. 214–15, 267–70; Pannenberg, <i class="calibre5">Basic Questions in Theology</i>, Vol. 1, pp. 117–83; Pollard, ‘The Impassibility of God,’ pp. 353–64; H. Wheeler Robinson, <i class="calibre5">Suffering Human and Divine</i>, p. 144; D. Soelle, <i class="calibre5">Suffering</i> (Philadelphia: Fortress Press, 1975), pp. 35–45; Swinburne, <i class="calibre5">The Coherence of Theism</i>, pp. 219–23; A. Torrance, ‘Does God Suffer?’ pp. 348–49; and Ward, <i class="calibre5">Religion and Creation</i>, pp. 192–214.</p>
<p class="ntull">57  Pollard, ‘The Impassibility of God,’ p. 354. Pollard states that ‘So alien is this idea [impassibility], so foreign is it to Hebraic-Christian thought, that it makes nonsense of the revelation of God in the Old Testament, it makes the Incarnation no real Incarnation, and it reduces the sufferings and death of Christ to a purely human work’ (p. 356). Pollard’s entire article attempts to demonstrate how the Greek notion of impassibility has adversely affected the theology of the Fathers.</p>
<p class="ntnl">Moltmann holds that the early Church Fathers attempted to combine two incompatible principles – divine immutability and impassibility with the central gospel message of God’s involvement in the world in all that this entails. He concludes: ‘The contradiction remains – and remains unsatisfactory.’ <i class="calibre5">The Trinity and the Kingdom of God</i>, p. 22. See also p. 23.</p>
<p class="ntull">58  Pannenberg, <i class="calibre5">Basic Questions in Theology</i>, Vol. 1, pp. 160, 162, 164, 165. See also pp. 119–20.</p>
<p class="ntull">59  Pannenberg, <i class="calibre5">Basic Questions in Theology</i>, Vol. 1, p. 162. For similar criticisms, see Forster, ‘Divine Passibility,’ pp. 23–51, especially p. 28, and Bauckham, ‘In Defence of <i class="calibre5">The Crucified God</i>,’ p. 94; Steen, ‘The Theme of the “Suffering” God,’ pp. 82–83, and Van Bavel, ‘Where is God When Human Beings Suffer,’ p. 149; Fiddes, <i class="calibre5">The Creative Suffering of God</i>, pp. 37–38; O’Donnell, <i class="calibre5">Trinity and Temporality</i>, pp. 24–25, 44–52; and T.F. Torrance, <i class="calibre5">The Christian Doctrine of God</i>, pp. 239–40. Pannenberg also believes that God’s immutable nature inevitably leads to Pelagianism since all change must take place ‘from man’s side’ (p. 163).</p>
<p class="ntnl">It should be noted here as well that the impassibility of God influences the Fathers’ understanding of redemption. Since God is impassible and since to be saved is to become God-like, then human beings should become less and less passible, that is, under the control of their emotions and passions. <i class="calibre5">Apatheia</i> becomes the supreme human virtue. See Bauckham, ‘Only the Suffering God Can Help,’ p. 8; and Moltmann, <i class="calibre5">The Trinity and the Kingdom of God</i>, p. 23.</p>
<p class="ntnl">Hallman, in <i class="calibre5">The Descent of God</i>, contends that, while almost all of the Fathers take as axiomatic the immutability and impassibility of God, there are some texts which diverge from this view (see p. xii). We will examine Hallman’s work more closely later in this study.</p>
<p class="ntull">60  Lee, <i class="calibre5">God Suffers for Us</i>, p. 40. See also pp. 30–32.</p>
<p class="ntull">61  Dorner, <i class="calibre5">Divine Immutability</i>, p. 110.</p>
<p class="ntull">62  Moltmann, <i class="calibre5">The Crucified God</i>, p. 253.</p>
<p class="ntull">63  H. Blocher, ‘Divine Immutability,’ p. 1.</p>
<p class="ntull">64  For example, see Fiddes, <i class="calibre5">The Creative Suffering of God</i>, pp. 44–45. While not everyone who advocates the passibility of God does so under the auspices of process theology, because it has been primarily responsible for setting the philosophical tone for much of the philosophical and theological advocacy of a passible and suffering God, I believe it important to present its position in some detail. Actually, process philosophy and theology, as a viable and coherent system, appears to be waning, and has for some time now, among scholars.</p>
<p class="ntull">65  See A.N. Whitehead, <i class="calibre5">Religion in the Making</i> (London: Cambridge University Press, 1926); <i class="calibre5">Process and Reality</i> (New York: Free Press, 1979); and C. Hartshorne, <i class="calibre5">The Divine Relativity</i> (New Haven: Yale University Press, 1948).</p>
<p class="ntull">66  For introductions to process theology, see J.A. Bracken and M.H. Suchocki, eds, <i class="calibre5">Trinity in Process: A Relational Theology of God</i> (New York: Continuum, 1997); J.B. Cobb, <i class="calibre5">A Christian Natural Theology</i> (London: Lutterworth Press, 1966); J.B. Cobb and D. Griffin, <i class="calibre5">Process Thought: An Introductory Exposition</i> (Philadelphia: Westminster Press, 1976); E.H. Cousins, ed., <i class="calibre5">Process Theology</i> (New York: Newman Press, 1971); R. Mellert, <i class="calibre5">What is Process Theology?</i> (New York: Paulist Press, 1975); D. Pailin, ‘The Utterly Absolute and the Totally Related: Change in God,’ <i class="calibre5">New Blackfriars</i> 68 (1987):243–55; S. Ogden, <i class="calibre5">The Reality of God</i> (New York: Harper and Row, 1961); N. Pittenger, <i class="calibre5">God in Process</i> (London: SCM, 1967) and <i class="calibre5">Process Thought and Christian Faith</i> (New York: Macmillan, 1968).</p>
<p class="ntnl">For brief accounts of process theology, see Fiddes, <i class="calibre5">The Creative Suffering of God</i>, pp. 37–45; C. Gunton, ‘Process Theology’s Concept of God,’ <i class="calibre5">The Expository Times</i> 84 (1972–73): 294–96; Vanhoutte, ‘God as Companion and Fellow-Sufferer,’ pp. 191–252; and Weinandy, <i class="calibre5">Does God Change?</i>, pp. 125–53. Some of what I say below is an abbreviated version of this account.</p>
<p class="ntull">67  S. Ogden, <i class="calibre5">The Reality of God</i>, p. 51. Ogden also states:</p>
<p class="bq1f">He [God] is said to be a reality which is in every respect absolute and whose only relations to the world are purely nominal or external relations of the world to him …: Accordingly, the attributes or perfections by which the nature of God is classically defined – pure actuality, immutability, impassivity, aseity, immateriality, etc. – all entail an unqualified negation beyond his own wholly absolute being (<i class="calibre5">ibid</i>., pp. 48–49).</p>
<p class="ntull">68  N. Pittenger, <i class="calibre5">Christology Reconsidered</i> (London: SCM, 1970), p. 137.</p>
<p class="ntull">69  Cousins, ‘Process Models in Culture, Philosophy, and Theology’ in <i class="calibre5">Process Theology</i>, p. 15.</p>
<p class="ntull">70  Whitehead, <i class="calibre5">Process and Reality</i>, p. 404.</p>
<p class="ntull">71  Whitehead, <i class="calibre5">Process and Reality</i>, p. 405.</p>
<p class="ntull">72  Pittenger, <i class="calibre5">Process Thought and Christian Faith</i>, pp. 29 and 30.</p>
<p class="ntull">73  D. Griffin, <i class="calibre5">A Process Christology</i> (Philadelphia: Westminster Press, 1973), p. 188. While Moltmann would not be classified as a process theologian, he nonetheless sees his own view of God’s relationship to the world as panentheistic. See <i class="calibre5">The Crucified God</i>, p. 277; <i class="calibre5">The Trinity and the Kingdom of God</i>, pp. 106–8; and <i class="calibre5">God in Creation: An Ecological Doctrine of Creation</i> (London: SCM, 1985), pp. 90–103. For comments on Moltmann’s panentheism and its relationship to process thought, see W. McWilliams, <i class="calibre5">The Passion of God: Divine Suffering in Contemporary Protestant Thought</i> (Macon: Mercer University Press, 1985), pp. 45, 48–49.</p>
<p class="ntull">74  Hallman, <i class="calibre5">The Descent of God</i>, p. 139. Hallman sees in Hegel and Whitehead a positive, if only partial, Christian alternative to the impassibility of God. See pp. 125–45. Fiddes writes in a similar vein.</p>
<p class="bq1f">While his [God’s] primordial nature is independent of the world, he also has a ‘consequent nature’ corresponding to his physical aspect, by which he himself prehends the world. That is, he absorbs influence from the world, receiving the effects of worldly action and decision into himself. In feeling the world like this he suffers, for while all entities contribute value to God they also actualize both good and evil through the choices they make, and God receives the effect of these; he also feels their experience of suffering. <i class="calibre5">The Creative Suffering of God</i>, p. 41.</p>
<p class="ntull">75  C. Hartshorne, <i class="calibre5">Man’s Vision of God and the Logic of Theism</i> (Hamden: Archon Books, 1964), p. 298. Sarot demonstrates that, for Hartshorne, God must be corporeal if he is to be passible (see <i class="calibre5">God, Passibility and Corporeality</i>, pp. 210–19). While Sarot is somewhat critical of Hartshorne’s understanding of God’s corporeality, he himself, nonetheless, argues that God’s passibility demands that God be corporeal. He finds in Aquinas’ denial that God is passible because he is incorporeal the basis for his own argument that God must be corporeal.</p>
<p class="bq1f">We have seen that there is a very close connection between emotion and corporeality: without corporeality no emotion. We have also seen that Aquinas poses the question whether God can have emotions and that the corporeality needed for emotions is an important reason for him to answer the question negatively …. Thus one of the reasons Aquinas provides for rejecting divine passibility is the fact that passibility is incompatible with incorporeality. <i class="calibre5">Ibid</i>. 118–19.</p>
<p class="ntnl">Sarot agrees with the logic of Aquinas, but turns it around. Because he believes, for biblical, philosophical and theological reasons, that God is passible, he argues that God must be corporeal (see <i class="calibre5">ibid</i>., pp. 160–208). In basic agreement with Jantzen (see <i class="calibre5">God’s World, God’s Body</i>) Sarot argues that only a corporeal God allows God to feel the world, and to be active and present in the world (see <i class="calibre5">ibid</i>., pp. 219–27). For Sarot’s complete understanding of God’s corporeality, see <i class="calibre5">ibid</i>., pp. 209–43.</p>
<p class="ntnl">While the vast majority of those who argue for the passibility of God would not wish to hold Sarot’s position that God is, therefore, corporeal, yet, I suspect, that Sarot has merely allowed the passibilist position to run its course and so come, as Aquinas was well aware, to its logical conclusion.</p>
<p class="ntnl">S.A. McFague also holds that the world is God’s body. See ‘Imaging a Theology of Nature: The World as God’s Body’ in <i class="calibre5">Liberating Life: Contemporary Approaches to Ecological Theology</i>, C. Birch, ed. (New York: Orbis, 1990), pp. 201–27. For a critique of such a view see J. Milbank, <i class="calibre5">The Word Made Strange: Theology, Language and Culture</i> (Oxford: Blackwell, 1997), pp. 257–67.</p>
<p class="ntull">76  Whitehead, <i class="calibre5">Process and Reality</i>, p. 351.</p>
<p class="ntull">77  Pittenger, <i class="calibre5">Christology Reconsidered</i>, p. 68.</p>
<p class="ntull">78  Pittenger, <i class="calibre5">God in Process</i>, p. 19. For complete expositions of process christology, see D. Griffin, <i class="calibre5">A Process Christology</i>; S. Ogden, <i class="calibre5">The Reality of God</i>; N. Pittenger, <i class="calibre5">The Word Incarnate</i> (Welwyn James Nisbet and Co., 1959) and <i class="calibre5">Christology Reconsidered</i>. For an introductory essay, see J.R. Baker, ‘The Christological Symbol of God’s Suffering’ in <i class="calibre5">Religious Experience and Process Theology</i>, eds H.J. Cargas and B. Lee (New York: Paulist Press, 1976), pp. 93–105.</p>
<p class="ntull">79  For a very readable and competent presentation of many of the theologians treated in this chapter, see W. McWilliams, <i class="calibre5">The Passion of God</i>. In this work he treats such theologians as Moltmann, Cone, Kitamori, and Lee.</p>
</body>
</html>
