<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en-US">
  <head>
    <title>Does God Suffer?</title>
    <link href="../styles/page-template.xpgt" rel="stylesheet" type="application/vnd.adobe-page-template+xml"/>
    <meta content="urn:uuid:e0000000-0000-0000-0000-000004626051" name="Adept.expected.resource"/>
    <meta http-equiv="Content-Type" content="text/html; charset=utf-8"/>
  <link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="../../stylesheet.css"/>
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="../../page_styles.css"/>
</head>
  <body class="calibre">
<p class="cta"><a id="page_40" class="calibre2"></a><a href="06_Contents.xhtml#ch3" id="ch3" class="calibre2">3</a></p>
<p class="cs"><a href="06_Contents.xhtml#ch3" class="calibre2">Yahweh: The Presence of the Wholly Other</a></p>
<p class="pn">In the first chapter I presented the case for the passibility of God and thus for his suffering. In the remainder of this study I wish to argue against such a notion and to demonstrate instead that God is impassible and so does not suffer. I want to show why the impassibility of God is absolutely essential if we are to embrace and to defend the biblical revelation of God as lovingly present and dynamically active in our midst, even to the point of his becoming man.</p>
<p class="in">The notion of God’s impassibility is a piece of a whole theological puzzle (mystery), and before we place this particular piece in its proper place we first must place some (many) other essential pieces in their proper place, otherwise the puzzle (mystery) will become distorted and the picture will never take its true configuration.<sup class="calibre6">1</sup> In this chapter I will focus almost exclusively on the Old Testament notion of God and the types of relationships he formed with the Hebrew people, and only then, from within this perspective, address the question of God’s impassibility.<sup class="calibre6">2</sup> As the first chapter demonstrated, one of the primary arguments for a passible God is its biblical warrant. It not only appears to bear strong witness to a passible God, but it also poses some of the greatest challenges to the traditional claim for God’s impassibility.<sup class="calibre6">3</sup></p>
<p class="in"><a id="page_41" class="calibre3"></a>Moreover, since the Bible is not a work of philosophy, I will not, as far as possible, take up the philosophical issues that arise from the scriptural revelation. While interpretation of the biblical data is necessary, I will attempt to let the Bible speak for itself, from within its own Hebraic thought-forms and Semitic concepts. These tend to be more functional and relational in character than ontological, that is, the Bible tends to speak in terms of how God and persons function and inter-relate rather than what they are ontologically in themselves. However, it is from within these relational concepts that we will discover the biblical notion of God, for by discerning the types of relationships God has with the created order, we will detect who God <i class="calibre5">is</i>.<sup class="calibre6">4</sup></p>
<p class="in">Similarly, inherent within the Bible’s Hebraic thought-forms and concepts lie principles or notions – ontological in nature – which pertain to a philosophical understanding of who God is and how he relates to what is other than himself. One of the goals of this chapter, having ascertained the biblical understanding of God and his relationships, is to discern what philosophical notion of God best upholds, clarifies, and enhances our understanding of the biblical truth of who God is and the manner in which he relates to the created historical order. In <a href="13_Chapter06.xhtml" class="calibre3">Chapter 6</a> I will propose a philosophical understanding of God and of his relationship to the created historical order which, I believe, underlies the biblical revelation, and thus necessarily flows from it.</p>
<p class="sec"><b class="calibre8">Transcendence and Immanence</b></p>
<p class="pn">God’s impassibility or passibility revolves around the question of God’s transcendence and immanence. What is the nature of God’s transcendence? In what way(s) does God transcend the created order – the cosmos and all that it contains? Does his transcendence demand that he be impassible? What is the nature of God’s immanence? How does he relate to and act within the created order – the cosmos and all that it contains? Does his immanence demand that he be passible?</p>
<p class="in">The Old Testament does not answer these questions in a speculative and systematic manner. The theology of the Hebrew people arises out of their experience of God as he is present in their midst and acts within their history. They experience his immanent working and in so doing simultaneously perceive that God is, in some sense, transcendent.<sup class="calibre6">5</sup> Thus the words and actions by which and in which Yahweh revealed his immanent presence are the very same words and actions by which and in which Yahweh revealed his transcendence, and thus ultimately whether or not he is impassible or passible.</p>
<p class="in"><a id="page_42" class="calibre3"></a>From within biblical revelation then, the immanence of God takes epistemological precedence. It is only because God first revealed himself within the created order, within time and history, that he came to be known as someone who, in some sense, is transcendent. However, because it is the transcendent God whom the Jewish people came to know through his immanent presence and action, it is his transcendence which takes ontological precedence. God revealed himself within time and history, and thus came to be known, only because he is the kind of God he is, that is, as one who is transcendent, and yet, capable of acting within the historical lives of persons and nations. The nature of God’s immanence is thus dependent upon the nature of his transcendence, and the Hebrew people came to know the nature of God’s transcendence only through his immanent presence and action. While there is an epistemological priority in the manner in which God is known and an ontological priority in the manner in which God is, and so can be known, the God who is transcendent is the same God who is immanent and vice-versa.<sup class="calibre6">6</sup> What then do the immanent words and actions of Yahweh reveal about his transcendence? Or, what kind of God has Yahweh, through his immanent words and actions, revealed himself to be?</p>
<p class="in">While it is not possible here to give a detailed account of the historical and theological development of the entire Old Testament understanding of Yahweh, it is necessary for our purposes to illustrate some of its distinguishing features. These will provide us with the necessary basis upon which we can biblically, and subsequently philosophically, address the issue of God’s impassibility or passibility.</p>
<p class="sec"><b class="calibre8">Yahweh: The One God of the Covenant</b></p>
<p class="pn">While the Israelites believed that God first intervened in their history through the call of Abraham and the patriarchs, the experience which defined them as a distinct people was God saving them from the slavery of Egypt. It was here that they initially experienced the presence, the power, the love, and the faithfulness of God. In his compassion and mercy God saw their plight and heard their cry (see Exod. 2:24–25). He raised up Moses and revealed to him his very own name (see Exod. 3:1–17). He rescued them through his mighty deeds (see Exod. 7–12) and acted so as to assure their escape (see Exod. 14). He provided for them in the desert (see Exod. 16–17) and made a covenant with them, giving them his own commandments (see Exod. 19–20). They would be his people and he would be their God (see Exod. 6:7; Deut. 26:17–19). This defining experience was appealed to and reshaped throughout the history and the writings of the Old Testament. It became the basis for the prophetic call to repentance and a return to faithfulness. It was seen as the hope in new and present crises. It became the assurance of present and future actions of God. What is it that the Israelites learned about God <a id="page_43" class="calibre3"></a>and his relationship to them from this defining experience and from subsequent experiences similar to it?</p>
<p class="in">First, the exilic covenant formed the experiential context from which the Old Testament understanding of God as Yahweh was formed and nurtured. This is so precisely because it was not the Hebrew people who initiated the covenant, nor did their notion of God arise out of abstract philosophical speculation, but rather Yahweh himself had intervened in their midst and bound himself to them in a unique manner different from that of any other nation. ‘Now therefore, if you obey my voice and keep my covenant, you shall be my treasured possession out of all the peoples. Indeed, the whole earth is mine, but you shall be for me a priestly kingdom and a holy nation’ (Exod. 19:5, see Deut. 7:6, 10:14–15). Thus, whatever else Yahweh might be, he is primarily experienced, and so known, as a God capable of establishing imminent and intimate relationships, and he does so at his own initiative. Only because of his love and faithfulness, and not out of any merit of their own, did Yahweh separate the Israelites from the other nations, and make them his own (see Deut. 7:7–11; 9:4–6).</p>
<p class="in">Second, it was from within this covenantal experience that the distinguishing characteristic of the Hebrew people took shape and was fostered – their belief in one God. However, this monotheistic faith did not come easy to the Israelites. In the early history of the Hebrew people this monotheistic faith did not exclude a belief in the existence of other gods, as their infidelity shows (see Deut. 9:7–21). ‘They had worshipped other gods and walked in the customs of the nations whom the L<small class="calibre10">ORD</small> drove out before the people of Israel’ (2 Kgs 17:7–8, see 9–18).<sup class="calibre6">7</sup> The one God of the Hebrews may have been the highest of deities, but he was not the only deity. Gradually, as monotheism rooted itself more deeply within the religious traditions, worship, and life of the Israelites, it excluded, despite their continued infidelity, belief in other deities. Yahweh, God of Israel, was not only the supreme god, he was also the only God. ‘Yahweh our God is one, the only Yahweh’ (Deut. 6:4, NJB).</p>
<p class="in">Third, this covenantal relationship bore witness to a specific type of monotheism. The covenant manifested that the one God was not an impersonal power or a distant deity, but a personal God who, because of his compassion, manifested the supreme covenantal virtue of faithful love (<i class="calibre5">hesed</i>). This faithful love guaranteed that Yahweh would be continually present to his people and would act in their midst on their behalf. ‘For what other great nation has a god so near to it as the L<small class="calibre10">ORD</small> our God is whenever we call to him’ (Deut. 4:7; see 32–34). The covenant revealed the personal, close, and familiar relationship which Yahweh had with his people.</p>
<p class="in">Before proceeding in our examination of the Old Testament notion of God, I wish to pause for a moment and interpret more fully what we have just seen. It abundantly illustrates the intimate nature of Yahweh’s <a id="page_44" class="calibre3"></a>personal presence and activity. He is a personal, loving God who acts in time even to the extent of making a covenant. His personal relationship to the world and its history is without question.</p>
<p class="in">What equally needs to be grasped is that, while an intimate covenantal relationship was made with the Israelites, which specified his loving presence and commitment, yet it was <i class="calibre5">the one God</i> – Yahweh – who established such a covenant. There may be many other gods, but they are all generically the same – gods of fertility and war, etc. Yahweh in his oneness is unique, and because he is the one God, the Israelites ultimately came to believe that he is the only God. Moreover, being the one God radically differentiates him from all else, even from the false and specious gods. While the Old Testament never treats the issue of ‘the One and the Many’ in a philosophical manner, nonetheless the more the unique oneness of God became manifest to the Israelites the more he was differentiated from all else – the many.<sup class="calibre6">8</sup> To say that God is one not only specified that there is numerically only one God, but also that, being one, he is distinct from all else.</p>
<p class="in">The intimate, personal covenant, which bound the Israelites to Yahweh, was unique therefore not only because it was with the one and only God Yahweh, but also because it was initiated by him, and he was able to initiate such a covenant precisely because he, as the one God who is distinct from all else, possessed the ability to do so. We see here that the covenantal relationship reveals the type of God Yahweh is. It is precisely his otherness, as the one and only God, distinct from all else, which allowed Yahweh to choose to bind the Hebrew nation to himself, and so to live in intimacy with it.<sup class="calibre6">9</sup></p>
<p class="in"><a id="page_45" class="calibre3"></a>At least three other essential attributes of Yahweh, which were also revealed within the covenantal relationship, nurtured and clarified his singularity, that is, that he is the Savior, the Creator, and All Holy. We will now examine each of these in turn.</p>
<p class="sec"><b class="calibre8">Yahweh: God the Savior</b></p>
<p class="pn">Because of Yahweh’s personal loving care, the Hebrew people learned that God is in their midst as the one who possesses the power to rescue and to save. Yahweh is God the Savior (see Is. 63:8). The very exodus event, within which the covenant was first established, proved this.</p>
<p class="bq1">We were Pharaoh’s slaves in Egypt, but the L<small class="calibre10">ORD</small> brought us out of Egypt with a mighty hand. The L<small class="calibre10">ORD</small> displayed before our eyes great and awesome signs and wonders against Egypt, against Pharaoh and all his household. He brought us out from there in order to bring us in, to give us the land that he promised on oath to our ancestors. Deut. 6:21–23; see 7:7–9.</p>
<p class="paft">Unlike the pagan gods, who are dead and lifeless and cannot save (see Is. 44:9-20, Jer. 10:3-5), Yahweh is the living God who acts in time and history, freeing his people from evil and distress (see Judg. 8:19, 1 Kgs 17:1). As Moses sang: ‘Who is like you, O L<small class="calibre10">ORD</small>, among the gods? Who is like you, majestic in holiness, awesome in splendor, doing wonders?’(Exod. 15:11, see 1–18). He fights with them in battle and delivers them from their enemies. ‘Know then today that the L<small class="calibre10">ORD</small> your God is the one who crosses over before you as a devouring fire; he will defeat them and subdue them before you’ (Deut. 9:3). He gives victory to David (see 2 Sam. 8:7, 14). He is able to save those who are incapable of defending themselves – the poor, the needy and the oppressed (see Ps. 18:27). Thus he is the Lord of history and of all the events which take place within history. ‘For dominion belongs to the L<small class="calibre10">ORD</small>, and he rules over the nations’ (Ps. 22:28). Therefore, ‘The L<small class="calibre10">ORD</small> will reign forever and ever’ (Exod. 15:18). The Old Testament abundantly testifies that no historical situation is outside Yahweh’s providential care nor immune from his saving action.</p>
<p class="in">Here again, it was in these intimate saving actions, where Yahweh marches with their armies, protects them from enemies mightier than themselves (2 Kgs 19:34, 20:6), that the Israelites found Yahweh to be other than the pagan gods and mightier than all human and natural powers. God is not seen as one among many saviors. He is not even seen as the mightiest of the mighty. As Savior, Yahweh stands unique and independent. ‘I have been the L<small class="calibre10">ORD</small> your God ever since the land of Egypt; you know no God but me, and besides me there is no saviour’ <a id="page_46" class="calibre3"></a>(Hos. 13:4). He is the sole Savior because he is the one and only God, and equally he is the sole God because he is the one and only Savior. No worldly power, no historical crisis, no natural threat is beyond him for he is other than them, and so can act in a manner that is in keeping with his unique distinctiveness. Because he is outside their parameters, Yahweh’s will and action is not frustrated by worldly power and might, nor hampered by the vicissitudes of history. The term Savior itself, a term that distinguished a specific relationship between Yahweh and his people, equally then identified his otherness. Yahweh could be the mighty Savior he was only because he surpassed all other-worldly and cosmic forces. The covenantal relationship which reveals Yahweh to be Savior is the same relationship which reveals that he is singular in his otherness as Savior.<sup class="calibre6">10</sup></p>
<p class="sec"><b class="calibre8">Yahweh: God the Creator</b></p>
<p class="pn">This loving and compassionate experience of Yahweh as the one God who is the sole Savior, nurtured the belief that he is likewise the Creator of all that is. While God is first Creator before he is Savior, yet experientially it was only as the Israelites encountered God as Savior that they came to realize that the God who has the power to save also possessed the unique power to create. Within the Hebrew scriptures the notion of Yahweh as Creator again expresses both the intimate presence of God and his radical otherness. It is his being the Creator that ultimately founds the close presence of Yahweh as the Wholly Other.<sup class="calibre6">11</sup></p>
<p class="in"><a id="page_47" class="calibre3"></a>The first creation story illustrates that Yahweh is distinct from all else that exists for he, in an orderly systematic manner, calls into existence the cosmos and all that it contains (see Gen. 1). Thus neither the cosmos nor anything within it is divine. Moreover, unlike the Babylonian gods, Yahweh does not form the world by doing battle with other cosmic deities, but rather he simply calls forth creation through his mere word (see Gen. 1; Pss 104, 148:8).<sup class="calibre6">12</sup> ‘By the word of the L<small class="calibre10">ORD</small> the heavens were made, and all their host by the breath of his mouth’ (Ps. 33:6). The pagan idols are dead, but Yahweh is the living God who made the earth and all that lives therein (see Jer. 10:1–16). The fact that all is dependent upon Yahweh manifests that he is everlasting. ‘Before the mountains were brought forth, or ever you had formed the earth and the world, from everlasting to everlasting you are God’ (Ps. 90:2; see Ps. 93:2).<sup class="calibre6">13</sup></p>
<p class="in">Yahweh being the Creator of all, and thus distinct from what he has made, means that he cannot be depicted. Only human persons are made in his image and likeness (Gen. 1:26–27), yet they too are creatures (see 2 Macc. 7:48). All idols depicting God are forbidden for as such they would misrepresent and so corrupt his complete otherness (Exod. 20:4–6, Deut. 5:8–10). ‘To whom then will you liken God, or what likeness compare with him?’ (Is. 40:18; see 40:25).</p>
<p class="in">On the one hand, the notion of Yahweh as Creator, who is distinct from all that he creates, and so can neither be depicted in any fashion nor numbered as one of the things created, radicalizes more completely the integral otherness of the one God who is Savior. Yet, simultaneously it is this same Creator God who is the Savior and who remains most intimate with his creation. Though not a creature, God, nonetheless, remains lovingly present to what he has made, especially to human beings, made in his own image and likeness, and with whom he communes (see Gen. 3:8). Psalm 139 gives beautiful expression to this truth.</p>
<p class="bq1">O Lord, you have searched me and known me. You know when I sit down and when I rise up; you discern my thoughts from far away…. Where can I go from your spirit? Or where can I flee from your presence? If I ascend to heaven, you are there; if I make my bed in Sheol, you are there. If I take the wings of the morning and settle at the farthest limits of the sea, even there your hand shall lead me, and your right hand shall hold me fast…. For it was you who <a id="page_48" class="calibre3"></a>formed my inward parts; you knit me together in my mother’s womb. I praise you, for I am fearfully and wonderfully made. Wonderful are your works; that I know very well. Ps. 139:1–2, 7–10, 13–14.</p>
<p class="in">The psalmist cannot escape the love and care of God precisely because, as other than creation, he is present everywhere and at all times. As Creator, he is in no way limited. Again, we see that the term Creator specifies both the relationship between Yahweh and his creation and simultaneously his radical distinctiveness from creation. It is the very otherness of God, as Creator, which allows him to be so close and intimate.<sup class="calibre6">14</sup></p>
<p class="sec"><b class="calibre8"><a id="page_49" class="calibre2"></a>Yahweh: God the All Holy</b></p>
<p class="pn">The experience of the Creator and Savior God of the covenant equally and simultaneously nurtured the notion that Yahweh was the All Holy God. For example, through his theophanies and mighty works Yahweh showed forth his holiness (see Exod. 19:3–20; Num. 20:1–13). Yahweh’s holy presence was both terrifying to approach (see 1 Sam. 6:19–21), and yet protective (see 2 Sam. 6:7–11). Yahweh, in the splendor of his holiness, took possession of the Tent of Meeting (see Exod. 40:34–35) and filled the temple with his glory (see 1 Kgs 8:10–11), and so dwelt in the midst of his people. The most sacred inner part of the temple, a specific place, literally secured within the earth, and so fixed in time and history, was called the Holy of Holies, for it was here that Yahweh specifically abided. Within the temple Isaiah experienced the thrice-holy presence of God (see Is. 6:1–5).</p>
<p class="in">The temple strikingly expresses both Yahweh’s presence and yet his complete otherness as All Holy, for within the Holy of Holies, this earthly place where Yahweh dwelt, there was no depiction of him – neither image or idol. As the All Holy wholly other, Yahweh could only be worshiped in awe and reverence. He could not be depicted. The very material splendor and grandeur of the temple itself accentuated the sacredness and the otherness of the one who abided therein.</p>
<p class="in">Moreover, Solomon’s prayer dedicating the temple equally manifests the complete otherness of Yahweh as the All Holy God. He acknowledges that his ‘name’ will be present in the temple and so affirms that Yahweh himself will abide there, and yet, since he is present in his ‘name,’ that he is not solely confined to the temple (see 1 Kgs 8:16, 29). His otherness exceeds and cannot be confined to his presence in the temple. Thus the constant refrain within Solomon’s prayer is that, when the people come to the temple to ask for forgiveness, or to seek favorable weather, or to be freed from famine and plague, or to win victory in battle, or even when the foreigner comes to the temple because he hears of Yahweh’s great name, Yahweh would ‘hear in heaven’ and answer their pleas (see 1 Kgs 8:30–53). The people come to the temple, for it is there that Yahweh abides, but it is from heaven that he hears and answers their prayers for, as the Wholly Other, his existence exceeds the limits and confines of this world. It is precisely because he does surpass this realm as the Wholly Other that he is able to do what they request of him concerning forgiveness, weather, plagues, and war.</p>
<p class="in">Only because Yahweh is holy in himself, dependent upon no other for his holiness, is he also able to sanctify those with whom he is covenanted. He was the one who brought the Israelites out of the desecration of slavery and made them his holy nation (see Lev. 11:44–5, 20:8, 22:32). God gave to his people the commandments so that in keeping them they <a id="page_50" class="calibre3"></a>might be as holy as he is holy (see Lev. 19:2, 20:7, 26). All the minute details of the law and worship had but one purpose – that of separating the Israelites from all defilement, so that they might embrace the holiness of God (see Lev. 17–26). ‘Thus you shall keep my commandments and observe them: I am the L<small class="calibre10">ORD</small>. You shall not profane my holy name, that I may be sanctified among the people of Israel: I am the L<small class="calibre10">ORD</small>; I sanctify you’ (Lev. 22:31–32).</p>
<p class="in">The sin of the Israelites, their infidelity to the covenant, defiled them and so separated them from the All Holy God (see Is. 5:24). This caused God to grieve over his people (see Ps. 73:21) and even to become angry with them, expelling them from his holy presence (see 2 Kgs 24:20). Yet, because of his faithful love and compassion, God sent forth the prophets to call the people to repentance and to a recommitment to the holy and faithful life of the covenant. Even though they had profaned his holy name among the nations, he would manifest the power of his holiness by purifying them of their uncleanness, making them once more holy (see Ezek. 36:16–36).</p>
<p class="in">The above can be summarized in the declaration that Yahweh is ‘the Holy One of Israel’ (Is. 10:20, 17:7). Yahweh is ‘the Holy One,’ and so dissimilar to Israel. Yet he is the Holy One ‘of Israel’ and so present to Israel making it holy. ‘I am God and no mortal; the Holy One in your midst’ (Hos. 11:9). This is Israel’s glory. ‘Then you shall rejoice in the L<small class="calibre10">ORD</small>; in the Holy One of Israel you shall glory’ (Is. 41:16; see 41:14–23; Ps. 71:22).</p>
<p class="in">Holiness, within the Hebrew scriptures, then, is not just one of many divine attributes, but rather characterizes Yahweh’s very identity (see Ps. 33:21; Am. 2:7). It identifies Yahweh’s moral goodness and perfection as well as his mighty and awesome power. It characterizes all that Yahweh is as God in majesty and glory. It evokes wonder, reverence, fear, and praise. It distinguishes him from all else. The very Semitic word, <i class="calibre5">qõdes</i>, (holiness) derives from the root meaning ‘to cut off’ or ‘to separate,’ and thus Yahweh, as holy, is other than all that is profane or sinful. Nonetheless, this identity of Yahweh as holy again illustrates the same pattern discerned with regard to his being One, Savior and Creator. Yahweh’s holiness was only manifested within the covenantal relationship, as he revealed himself in the midst of his people. The theophanies, the sanctification of his people, and especially his abiding presence in the temple, portrayed then that the one who was present as the All Holy was indeed the same one who was wholly other as the All Holy.<sup class="calibre6">15</sup></p>
<p class="sec"><b class="calibre8">The Mature Proclamation of Deutero-Isaiah</b></p>
<p class="pn">In examining the Hebrew understanding of Yahweh as One, Savior, Creator and All Holy, I have purposely tried to avoid quoting from Deutero-Isaiah. The reason is that he expresses the mature Hebrew <a id="page_51" class="calibre3"></a>understanding of Yahweh, and so I would now like to use his prophetic words to summarize what we have learned thus far.</p>
<p class="in">Deutero-Isaiah adamantly proclaims that the pagan idols are merely the handiwork of men. They are crafted out of wood, silver and gold. Their eyes are shut. Their ears are closed. They are mindless. They are lifeless and are actually nothing at all. ‘No, they are all a delusion; their works are nothing; their images are empty wind’ (Is. 41:29).<sup class="calibre6">16</sup> In contrast to the many lifeless idols, Yahweh is the one and only God who is alive and active. ‘I am the L<small class="calibre10">ORD</small>, and there is no other; besides me there is no god’ (Is. 45:5).<sup class="calibre6">17</sup> His singularity is highlighted by the repeated phrases ‘I, I am He,’ and ‘I am Yahweh’ (see Is. 43:13, 15, 25; 45:3–7; 48:12; 49:23; 51:15). This singularity denotes the complete otherness of Yahweh. It attests that Yahweh is not only numerically one, but also that he is singular in his mode of existence. He cannot be numbered among the gods or anything else that exists.</p>
<p class="in">The singularity of Yahweh is re-enforced within the proclamation that he alone is the Savior, Creator, and Holy One of Israel. All of these cluster around and so amplify the understanding of the one God, Yahweh.</p>
<p class="in">Yahweh is with his people and thus they need not be afraid for he will help and uphold them with his ‘victorious right hand’ (Is. 41:10; see v. 13; 43:5). He has redeemed Israel and called her by name (see Is. 43:1). ‘I will help you, says the L<small class="calibre10">ORD</small>, your Redeemer is the Holy One of Israel’ (Is. 41:41; see 43:3, 44:6, 48:17). Yahweh’s salvation is everlasting and for all peoples (see Is. 45:17, 22). ‘There is no other god besides me, a righteous God and a Savior, there is no one besides me’ (Is. 45:21).</p>
<p class="in">Deutero-Isaiah closely aligns Yahweh as Savior and Yahweh as Creator. ‘Thus says the L<small class="calibre10">ORD</small>, your Redeemer, who formed you in the womb: I am the L<small class="calibre10">ORD</small>, who made all things’ (Is. 44:24). As Creator he is awesome in majesty and can be compared with nothing. ‘Who has measured the waters in the hollow of his hand and marked off the heavens with a span, enclosed the dust of the earth in a measure and weighed the mountains in a scales and the hills in a balance’ (Is. 40:12; see v. 22, 42:5). Because of this, his wisdom and knowledge are unsurpassable (see Is. 40:13–14). Because he is the author of all ‘The L<small class="calibre10">ORD</small> is the everlasting God, the Creator of the ends of the earth. He does not faint or grow weary, his understanding is unsearchable’ (Is. 40:28; see v. 26). All that is seen, ‘the Holy One of Israel has created it’ (Is. 41:20). He created human beings for his glory (see Is. 43:7). As the Creator he is ‘the first’ and ‘the last’ (Is. 41:4).</p>
<p class="in">As the above quotations already note, Yahweh creates and saves as ‘The Holy One of Israel.’ After contemplating all that was made, ‘To whom then will you compare me, or who is my equal? says the Holy One’ (Is. 40:25). In all danger and peril the people can trust in Yahweh. ‘For I am the L<small class="calibre10">ORD</small> your God, the Holy One of Israel, your Saviour’ (Is. <a id="page_52" class="calibre3"></a>43:3). Because Yahweh is the Holy One, ‘I, I am He who blots out your transgressions for my own sake, and I will not remember your sins’ (Is. 43:25; see 42:6). As the Redeemer and the Holy One of Israel, Yahweh will raise up his chosen people even though they are despised by the nations and rulers (see Is. 49:7) for he ‘makes the rulers of the earth as nothing’ (Is. 40:23).</p>
<p class="in">The whole of Deutero-Isaiah can be summed up in this verse. ‘I am the L<small class="calibre10">ORD</small>, your Holy One, the Creator of Israel, your King’ (Is. 43:15).</p>
<p class="in">Nowhere in the Old Testament do we find the confirmation of Yahweh’s activity in time and history so majestically and ardently proclaimed. The terms Creator, Savior, and Holy One all testify to Yahweh’s presence and activity as the one and only God of whom there is no other. They are all relational concepts which express the activity and closeness of Yahweh to his people. Yet, within these very relationships, the singularity of Yahweh, as wholly other, is simultaneously evident and transparently manifest.<sup class="calibre6">18</sup> It is here that I must draw some conclusions, some of which should be already apparent.</p>
<p class="sec"><b class="calibre8"><a id="page_53" class="calibre2"></a>Yahweh: Present and Active as the Wholly Other</b></p>
<p class="pn">I have briefly summarized four major aspects of the Hebrew understanding of Yahweh – that he is One, Savior, Creator and All Holy. I have tried to accentuate the relational character of God in the Old Testament. Yahweh is the One All Holy Creator God who, in his love and compassion, made a covenant with his people and was personally present to and acted within their midst, within time and history, as Savior. I have equally argued that in so doing Yahweh simultaneously manifested his complete otherness. Within the Hebrew scriptures, to say that Yahweh is One, Savior, Creator and All Holy is to say, at one and the same time, within the same concepts, that he is present and active as the one who is wholly other, and that he is present and active in time and history, as the Wholly Other without jeopardizing his total otherness in so doing. The words and actions by which and in which Yahweh revealed his presence are the very same words and actions by which and in which Yahweh revealed his wholly and complete otherness.</p>
<p class="in">That God is able to be present and active as the Wholly Other, and is present and active only because he is the Wholly Other is, I believe, the primary, central and pivotal mystery of biblical revelation and of the Jewish/Christian faith. There is no mystery that is more remarkable or more fundamental. It is the Mystery. To state this mystery more philosophically: While God, in his complete otherness, is ontologically distinct from the created order, and thus from all other beings, yet he is able to bring into existence, be present to, and act within the created order as one who is ontologically distinct from the created order, and he is able to do so only because he is ontologically distinct. Moreover, he is able to do so, in his wholly otherness, without forfeiting his wholly otherness in so doing.<sup class="calibre6">19</sup> All other mysteries are founded upon and give expression to this <a id="page_54" class="calibre3"></a>mystery. For example, as we will examine in <a href="15_Chapter08.xhtml" class="calibre3">Chapter 8</a>, in the Incarnation, the Son of God, in the fulness of his divinity, actually comes to exist as man and so be man, in time and history, without mitigating his full divinity in so doing and existing. The incarnation is but an example of this fundamental mystery expressed in its most pure and intense form. How such an understanding of God and his ability to be present to and act within the created order of time and history can be sustained philosophically will be treated in <a href="13_Chapter06.xhtml" class="calibre3">Chapter 6</a>. Here I wish to emphasize, resolutely and clearly, that this is the biblical and revelational mystery that must be philosophically sustained, clarified and amplified. This understanding of the mystery of God’s otherness and his presence to and activity within the created order is absolutely central to this study concerning the question of God’s impassibility.</p>
<p class="in">I believe then that any understanding of God’s activity in time and history which undermines his total otherness is not in keeping with biblical revelation. This is so not just for the sake of defending the otherness of God as God, but more importantly to uphold the significance of his activity within the created order. It is of no advantage to uphold the complete otherness of God if it is not the wholly other God who is present to and acts within the created order. Equally, and this point many contemporary theologians fail to grasp, it is of no advantage to uphold the intimate presence and activity of God within the created order if it is not the wholly other God who is so present and active. The whole significance of Yahweh’s presence and activity, expressed in his love, care, and compassion, is predicated precisely on the truth that it is actually God, in his wholly otherness as God, who is present and active. To make God less than wholly other in order to promote or protect his presence and activity is to undermine the very importance of his presence and activity. If it is not the wholly other God who is acting in time and history and forming personal relationships with his people, then the whole significance of this activity and these relationships is lost.</p>
<p class="in">Moreover, God is able to establish such intimate relationships only because he is the Wholly Other. To make God less than wholly other does not make him more personal, loving, and compassionate, but rather he would be less personal, loving and compassionate.<sup class="calibre6">20</sup> If God were not the Wholly Other, he could not be the Creator, the Savior, and the Holy One capable of the intimate presence and the dynamic actions that these designations disclose.</p>
<p class="sec"><b class="calibre8"><a id="page_55" class="calibre2"></a>Transcendence and Immanence Revisited</b></p>
<p class="pn">While I briefly stated, at the onset of this chapter, that the notion of God’s transcendence and immanence is pivotal to the discussion of his being impassible or passible, I have, as I stated I would, avoided the use of the terms ‘transcendent,’ ‘transcendence,’ ‘immanent,’ and ‘immanence’ in describing who God is in relationship to all else. The reason is that these terms, when describing God and his relationship to all else, are I believe, often misconceived. It is only now, having examined the Hebrew understanding of God and his relationship to the created order that it is possible to discern clearly the biblical notion of God’s transcendence and immanence.</p>
<p class="in">From the biblical perspective, as witnessed in the Hebrew scriptures, for God to be transcendent does not mean that there are certain aspects of God’s being or nature which are distinct from those aspects of God’s nature which allow him to be immanent. To say that God transcends the created order of time and history does not mean that there are properties within God which make him unlike the created order and which then differ from those properties which allow him to act within the created order. If one understands God to be transcendent in this manner, as possessing qualities which differ from those qualities which make him immanent, this would mean that those qualities which make him transcendent are the divine peculiarities which make him inaccessible, separate, or apart from the created order of time and history. This is precisely how many theologians today, as witnessed in the opening chapter, conceive God’s transcendence. Transcendence specifies those qualities in God which not only make him distinct from all else, but also make him disassociated, and so disconnected, from all else. Thus, many theologians today, who conceive God’s transcendence in this manner, argue that God’s transcendence, that is, those qualities which make him isolated and aloof, must be diminished in some manner and/or that the qualities which make him more accessible be amplified in some manner so as to make it possible for him to be immanent.<sup class="calibre6">21</sup> However, this understanding <a id="page_56" class="calibre3"></a>of God and of his transcendence and immanence is completely contrary to biblical revelation.</p>
<p class="in">The Old Testament never conceives of God’s transcendence in opposition to his immanence, as if that which makes God wholly other is different from that which allows him to be a personal God who lovingly acts in time and history. For the Bible, transcendence and immanence do not describe two divine modes of being or two sets of distinguishing qualities – one as God is apart from the created order and another as he is in relation to the created order. For God to be transcendent in the biblical understanding means that he is wholly other than the created order but not apart from the created order. That which makes him divine, and thus wholly other and so transcendent, is that which equally allows him to be active within the created order and so be immanent. There is no opposition between God’s transcendent being and his immanent activity.<sup class="calibre6">22</sup> As I have argued throughout, to say that Yahweh is the One All Holy Creator and Savior is to express his immanent activity as the Wholly Other. To use present-day jargon, the biblical understanding of God’s transcendence is precisely what makes him ‘user friendly’ or ‘creation order compatible.’<sup class="calibre6">23</sup> The biblical notion of transcendence is not then a description of how God exists in himself as isolated from the <a id="page_57" class="calibre3"></a>created order, but rather how he exists in relation to the created order. For God to be transcendent means that he intimately relates to, is lovingly present to, and dynamically acts within the created order as the one who is ontologically wholly other than the created order.</p>
<p class="in">Actually, God in himself is neither transcendent nor immanent. He is just God. Transcendence, by its very nature, only expresses who God is in relation to what he is not, that is, that he is not ‘a part’ of the created order and therefore, as such, transcends it. God’s mode of being God differs then in kind and not just in degree from all else that exists. Equally, to speak of God’s immanence is not to speak of God in himself as if there were aspects of him which are part of the created order, but rather ‘immanence’ specifies that he who is not ‘a part’ of the created order is nonetheless present to and active within it.<sup class="calibre6">24</sup></p>
<p class="in">As I stated above, this is the great mystery of the Judeo-Christian tradition. It is a mystery precisely because, while we may know that this is what God has clearly revealed about himself and about his relationship to the created order, we can neither thoroughly comprehend nor adequately explain it. The reason for this is simply put – we are dealing with the incomprehensible God. If we did believe that we could comprehend and explain it fully, we would no longer be dealing with God, and so, whatever answer we arrived at, it could not possibly be true.<sup class="calibre6">25</sup> In this chapter I have merely attempted to clarify and to state exactly what the mystery is. In <a href="13_Chapter06.xhtml" class="calibre3">Chapter 6</a> I will try to give philosophical warrant for this mystery, and so hopefully provide greater clarity and exactness, but it will still remain a mystery.</p>
<p class="sec"><a id="page_58" class="calibre2"></a><b class="calibre8">The Passion of Yahweh</b></p>
<p class="pn">Having examined the Hebrew understanding of God and of his relationship to the created order, it is now possible to address the question of whether or not the Old Testament conceives Yahweh as impassible or passible. This question, by necessity, entails philosophical issues, issues that the Hebrew scriptures do not address. Because of this a full answer to the question cannot be given at this juncture, but must await the following chapters. Nonetheless, some biblical insights can be obtained.</p>
<p class="in">We saw in <a href="08_Chapter01.xhtml" class="calibre3">Chapter 1</a> that many contemporary theologians argue that the Hebrew scriptures bear copious and even undeniable witness to God’s passibility. Heschel’s concept of ‘divine pathos’ seems to articulate well the whole of Yahweh’s character and bearing. However, does this ‘divine pathos’ reveal a passible God?<sup class="calibre6">26</sup> We must consider some of the key texts.</p>
<p class="in">First, there are passages where Yahweh suffers on behalf of, with, or because of his people, and so grieves with or over them.<sup class="calibre6">27</sup> As Yahweh witnessed the suffering of his people in Egypt and delivered them (see Exod. 3:7–12), so he raised up judges and rescued his people from their enemies ‘for the L<small class="calibre10">ORD</small> would be moved to pity by their groaning’ (Judg. 2:18). The sin of his people caused Yahweh to suffer and grieve most. ‘How often they rebelled against him in the wilderness and grieved him in the desert!’ (Ps. 78:40). For forty years Yahweh ‘loathed that generation and said, “They are a people whose hearts go astray, and they do not regard my way.” Therefore in my anger I swore, “They shall not enter my rest’” (Ps. 95:10–11). Even though his people acted as an adulterous prostitute and so suffered the consequences, yet Yahweh cleansed his people from all defilement. ‘I will take you for my wife forever; I will take you for my wife in righteousness and in justice, in steadfast love, and in mercy. I will take you for my wife in faithfulness; and you shall know the L<small class="calibre10">ORD</small>’ (Hos. 2:19–20). From Israel’s infancy Yahweh loved him and taught him to walk. Yahweh led his people ‘with cords of human kindness and with bands of love’ (Hos. 11:4). Despite their wayward ungratefulness and obstinacy of heart, Yahweh could not give his people up. ‘My heart recoils within me; my compassion grows warm and tender. I will not execute my fierce anger … for I am God and no mortal, the Holy One in your midst, and I will not come in wrath’ (Hos. 11:8–9; see Jer. 31:20). The Book of Isaiah recalls all ‘the gracious deeds of the L<small class="calibre10">ORD</small>’ because of ‘his mercy’ and ‘the abundance of his steadfast love.’ Yahweh did not save them by a ‘messenger or angel, but his presence saved them; in his love and in his pity he redeemed them’ (Is. 63:7–9). Isaiah assures the people that if they seek Yahweh, who is ever near, and forsake their wickedness and return to him, then he will show them great mercy and abundant pardon. ‘For my thoughts are not your thoughts, nor are your ways my ways, says the L<small class="calibre10">ORD</small>. For as the heavens are higher than the <a id="page_59" class="calibre3"></a>earth, so are my ways higher than your ways and my thoughts above your thoughts’ (Is. 55:6–9). Indeed the passion – the pathos – of Yahweh is nowhere more ardently and fervently expressed than in these and similar passages.</p>
<p class="in">The traditional defense for God’s impassability is simply to argue that the Bible in such passages is using anthropomorphic language, and so cannot be taken literally. Therefore, it is argued, God does not actually ‘groan’ or ‘suffer,’ nor does his heart ‘grow warm.’ Undoubtedly, the Bible is using anthropomorphic language, but it, nonetheless, is attempting to say something that is actually true about God. Many contemporary theologians emphasize the latter, and so argue that God must be passible if his groaning, suffering and love are to be actual and genuine. What both sides of the debate miss in the interpretation of these passages is that the one who is so filled with passion is the Wholly Other. It is Yahweh, ‘the Holy One in your midst.’ The very superlative, extravagant, and even excessive, expression of the love, the compassion, the forgiveness and, indeed, the anger, accentuates that the one who displays all of this intense passion is someone who transcends what is beyond the merely customary and human. This is why Yahweh ‘is God and no mortal.’ What makes Yahweh’s thoughts so different from our own and what makes his ways so different from our own is that he is so different from us. The difference is far greater than is the distance ‘between heaven and earth.’ Yes, Yahweh is passionate but it is the passion of the Wholly Other, and he is able to express such depth of passion only because he is the Wholly Other. Therefore, there is a legitimate literalness to what is being said, but it is a literalness that must be interpreted from within the complete otherness of God, for this is the manner in which this passion is expressed. If God were not wholly other, he would not be able to be as passionate as he is. Therefore, if one were to conceive of God’s love, suffering and groaning in such a manner as to undermine his complete otherness, then his love, suffering and groaning would be diminished, and thus the significance of his love, suffering and groaning would be completely lost. How God can be wholly other and yet love, suffer and groan is a philosophical issue. Here I wish only to assert emphatically, on biblical grounds, that Yahweh is passionate as the Wholly Other and that his passion can in no way diminish his wholly otherness for it is the wholly otherness of his passion which allows for and confers upon it its true divine significance and singular definition.<sup class="calibre6">28</sup></p>
<p class="sec"><b class="calibre8">Does Yahweh Change His Mind?</b></p>
<p class="pn">Even if one grants that it is Yahweh, as the Wholly Other, who is passionate, it does seem that he is nonetheless changeable and, therefore, <a id="page_60" class="calibre3"></a>passible. Does not his compassion ‘<i class="calibre5">grow</i> warm and tender’ as if he had been ‘cool’ towards his people and now has aroused his love anew? Does he not say, ‘I will not execute my fierce anger,’ as if he had changed his mind? This arousal of love and this cooling of anger appear to express change in Yahweh, and one that is founded upon the passibility of his passionate nature.</p>
<p class="in">In the Hebrew scriptures Yahweh appears to change his mind quite frequently. For example, Yahweh, in seeing how wicked the human race had become, was ‘sorry that he had made humankind on the earth, and it grieved him to his heart’ (Gen. 6:6–7). Or again, Moses implores Yahweh to ‘change your mind and do not bring disaster on your people,’ and ‘the L<small class="calibre10">ORD</small> changed his mind about the disaster that he planned to bring on his people’ (Exod. 32:12, 14). Moreover, on seeing the repentance of the Ninevites, ‘God changed his mind about the calamity that he had said he would bring upon them; and he did not do it’ (Jon. 3:10). This is precisely what upset Jonah. He knew God would, in his graciousness and kindness, ‘relent’ (Jon. 4:2; see Joel 2:13). Yahweh hopes that his people will reform their lives, so that ‘I may change my mind about the disaster that I intend’ (Jer. 26:3).</p>
<p class="in">However, there are equally numerous passages about Yahweh not changing his mind. ‘God is not a human being, that he should lie, or a mortal, that he should change his mind’ (Num. 23:19). ‘The L<small class="calibre10">ORD</small> has sworn and will not change his mind’ (Ps. 110:4). Yahweh swore an oath to David ‘from which he will not turn back’ (Ps. 132:11). Because of the sin of his people Yahweh promised: ‘I have not relented nor will I turn back’ (Jer. 4:28). Equally Ezekiel states: ‘I the L<small class="calibre10">ORD</small> have spoken; the time is coming, I will act. I will not refrain, I will not spare, I will not relent. According to your ways and your doings I will judge you, says the L<small class="calibre10">ORD</small> God’ (Ezek. 24:14; see Zech. 8:14).</p>
<p class="in">The classic passage, which brings into relief the whole discussion, is 1 Samuel 15. Here Yahweh ‘regrets’ and ‘is sorry’ that he had made Saul king, for he has turned away (1 Sam. 15:11, 35). And yet, in the very same chapter, Samuel states: ‘Moreover the Glory of Israel will not recant or change his mind; for he is not a mortal, that he should change his mind’ (1 Sam. 15:29).</p>
<p class="in">I have quoted these passages not just to highlight the biblical dilemma over Yahweh’s impassible or passible nature, but more to illustrate that there needs to be an interpretative or hermeneutical tool for bringing consistency to them. To interpret these statements on the same level, that is, to say that God, in one and the same manner, does and does not change his mind is to predicate of God something which necessarily demands an irreconcilable contradiction. However, if the seemingly contradictory statements are attempting to say different things about God on different levels then both could be true without contradiction.</p>
<p class="in">In the passages that speak of Yahweh changing his mind, the first thing to notice is that this is predicated upon or conditioned by a change in the people involved. God is sorry because the human race or Saul have become sinful. He relents because the Ninevites or the Hebrew people have repented. One could argue then that the change takes place in others – their sin or repentance – but that a change does not take place in <a id="page_61" class="calibre3"></a>God. He remains unchanging and unchangeable.<sup class="calibre6">29</sup> However, this does not arrive at the heart of the matter, for Yahweh, in his holiness, truly does ‘react’ to sin, and in his mercy, he does ‘respond’ to repentance. The question is: Does this ‘reaction’ necessarily imply that he passibly changes?</p>
<p class="in">Is not the ‘reaction’ an expression of a deeper truth – that of his unchanging and unalterable love for his people and of his demand for moral rectitude? In a sense God is said ‘to change his mind’ precisely because, as the Wholly Other, ‘he does not change his mind.’ The interpretative tool here is the same as that articulated throughout. The very language that is used, being ‘sorry,’ ‘relenting,’ ‘repenting,’ and ‘changing’ of mind seeks to express Yahweh’s unswerving and unalterable love which is expressed in his compassion, mercy and forgiveness, and equally, that he is adamant in his demand for goodness and justice. Yahweh then is sorry that he appointed Saul not just because Saul had changed, but he is equally sorry because he, as God, has not changed. The sorrow is an expression of the fact that ‘the Glory of Israel will not recant or change his mind; for he is not a mortal, that he should change his mind.’ The All Holy God consistently demands righteousness and this very consistency is expressed in his sorrow. Thus the statement that God does not change his mind is an expression of God’s total otherness, and the statement that God does change his mind expresses this unchangeable mind of God under circumstances which, under ordinary human conditions (if God were man), would demand that a change of mind take place, but in actual fact need not, because God, as the Wholly Other, is constant in his love, forgiveness, righteousness and justice. ‘God is not a human being, that he should lie, or a mortal, that he should change his mind’ (Num. 23:19).</p>
<p class="sec"><b class="calibre8">Ontological or Ethical Immutability?</b></p>
<p class="pn">The crucial question at this juncture is: Have I shown, from biblical evidence, that God is ontologically immutable or ethically immutable? That is, is God ontologically incapable of undergoing passionate changes, such as going from anger to repentance, grieving to joy, sorrow to forgiveness? Or, is God ethically immutable, in that he is consistently true to himself and to his perfect love and justice, and this is manifested in his changeable and passible actions and reactions to our various human conditions? Thus, while God may be ethically unchangeable in his moral rectitude, is he ontologically changeable as witnessed by his changing passible states, such as, anger, repentance, forgiveness, grieving, joy and suffering?<sup class="calibre6">30</sup></p>
<p class="in"><a id="page_62" class="calibre3"></a>I obviously have been arguing for the former, and I have been arguing for it from within a biblical setting. I believe that the singular passion of God’s love, compassion, mercy, forgiveness, anger, etc., as witnessed in the Hebrew scriptures, demands that his passionate love, compassion, mercy, forgiveness, anger, etc. be that of the Wholly Other, for these passions themselves arise out of and testify to his total otherness. To <a id="page_63" class="calibre3"></a>make God passible in his passion, I believe, undercuts the wholly otherness of God, and so diminishes the biblical, and so divine, significance of his passion or pathos (to use Heschel’s term). However, because the Bible does not address the philosophical issues which now loom large, a complete and thorough demonstration has not been possible.<sup class="calibre6">31</sup> Nonetheless, I believe the biblical foundation which I have laid, that is, that Yahweh is present and active within the created order as the Wholly Other without diminishing his wholly otherness, actually leads to and demands a philosophical argument for the ontological impassibility of God.</p>
</body>
</html>
