<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en-US">
  <head>
    <title>Does God Suffer?</title>
    <link href="../styles/page-template.xpgt" rel="stylesheet" type="application/vnd.adobe-page-template+xml"/>
    <meta content="urn:uuid:e0000000-0000-0000-0000-000004626051" name="Adept.expected.resource"/>
    <meta http-equiv="Content-Type" content="text/html; charset=utf-8"/>
  <link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="../../stylesheet.css"/>
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="../../page_styles.css"/>
</head>
  <body class="calibre">
<p class="sec1" id="calibre_pb_0"><a id="page_64" class="calibre3"></a>Addendum: A. Heschel and Divine ‘Pathos’</p>
<p class="pn">As was noted in <a href="08_Chapter01.xhtml" class="calibre3">Chapter 1</a>, Heschel’s exposition of divine ‘pathos’ within the writings of the Hebrew prophets has greatly influenced many contemporary theologians who espouse a passible and suffering God. Because of this, and because I do not think that these theologians have interpreted Heschel in an entirely correct manner, I wish to present here a brief addendum and critique of his thought.</p>
<p class="in">Heschel, throughout his study, stresses that the prophetic knowledge of God was not abstract, philosophic, syllogistic, or speculative. Rather, the prophets obtained their knowledge of God through their interaction and fellowship with the living God.<sup class="calibre6">32</sup> Within this relationship ‘pathos’ became the central category for their understanding God. Thus Heschel can describe divine pathos as follows:</p>
<p class="bq1">He [God] is also moved and affected by what happens to the world, and reacts accordingly. Events and human actions arouse in him joy or sorrow, pleasure or wrath. He is not conceived as judging the world in detachment. He reacts in an intimate and subjective manner, and this determines the value of events. Quite obviously in the biblical view, man’s deeds may move him, affect him, grieve him or, on the other hand, gladden and displease him. This notion that God can be intimately affected, that he possesses not merely intelligence and will, but also pathos, basically defines the prophetic consciousness of God.<sup class="calibre6">33</sup></p>
<p class="in">It would appear that Heschel is here advocating a passible understanding of God. While he emphasizes, as do many others, that human deeds and situations do not necessitate God’s pathos, but only offer the occasion for God freely to bestow his pathos, yet he equally emphasizes that ‘the predicament of man is a predicament of God who has a stake in the human situation.’<sup class="calibre6">34</sup> Heschel clearly contrasts this biblical view of <a id="page_65" class="calibre3"></a>God’s pathos with that of the Greek philosophical notion of God’s self-sufficiency and apathy, which, he believes, has come to dominate both Jewish and Christian thought down to the present.<sup class="calibre6">35</sup> Divine pathos, for Heschel, demands that ‘the grandeur of God implies the capacity to experience emotion…. It [pathos] finds its deepest expression in the fact that God can actually suffer. At the heart of the prophetic affirmation is the certainty that God is concerned about the world.’<sup class="calibre6">36</sup></p>
<p class="in">It is this understanding of divine pathos that many contemporary theologians embrace. However, it is at this point in Heschel’s exposition that a shift occurs, a shift that theologians have failed to acknowledge or appreciate. Indeed, even Heschel himself may have failed fully to consider its significance.</p>
<p class="in">Heschel rightly maintains that the prophets, the psalmists and the authors of the Wisdom literature show no apprehension that their portrayal of divine pathos in any way jeopardizes the one, unique and transcendent God. This fear has arisen because divine pathos has been understood in an anthropomorphic or anthropopathic sense, that is, that God can actually be conceived in literal human terms. However, such an interpretation, Heschel argues, was utterly foreign to the biblical mentality. ‘Since the human could never be regarded as divine, there was no danger that the language of pathos would distort the difference between God and man.’<sup class="calibre6">37</sup> Therefore, according to Heschel, the term ‘anthropopathy’ should not be applied to the prophetic understanding of divine pathos.</p>
<p class="bq1">The term applies properly to religions in which there is no discrepancy between imagination and expression: the gods are conceived of as human beings and described as human beings – in their appearance, their way of life, their passions, their occupations. These are myths and images. In contrast, the biblical man’s imagination knows nothing about God, how he lives and what occupies him. He is God and not man (Hos. 11:9, Is. 31:3).<sup class="calibre6">38</sup></p>
<p class="in">Here we discern the shift in Heschel’s exposition. Yes, God does <a id="page_66" class="calibre3"></a>possess pathos, but it cannot be conceived in any anthropomorphic or anthropopathic manner. ‘The error in regarding the divine pathos as anthropomorphism consisted in regarding a unique theological category as a common psychological concept. This was due to the complex nature of prophetic language, which of necessity combines otherness and likeness, uniqueness and comparability, in speaking about God.’<sup class="calibre6">39</sup> The difficulty is that human beings more easily perceive the similarities between divine and human pathos rather than being cognisant of the radical dissimilarities. However, to conceive God’s pathos in such a manner is ‘a form of humanization of God, [and so] the profound significance of this fundamental category is lost.’<sup class="calibre6">40</sup> The true significance of divine pathos lies precisely, for Heschel, in its dissimilarity for this is what makes God’s pathos truly divine and unique. Statements of divine pathos must not be lowered to the human level, but raised to a ‘superhuman’ level. Words expressing divine pathos, while psychological in nature, are ‘endowed with a theological connotation. In the biblical expressions of divine emotions … the religious consciousness experiences a sense of superhuman power rather than a conception of resemblance to man.’</p>
<p class="bq1">The idea of the divine pathos combining absolute selflessness with supreme concern for the poor and the exploited can hardly be regarded as the attribution of human characteristics. Where is the man who is endowed with such characteristics? Nowhere in the Bible is man characterized as merciful, gracious, slow to anger, abundant in love and truth, keeping love to the thousandth generation. Pathos is a thought that bears a resemblance to an aspect of divine reality as related to the world of man. As a theological category, it is a genuine insight into God’s relatedness to man, rather than a projection of human traits into divinity, as found for example in the god images of mythology.<sup class="calibre6">41</sup></p>
<p class="in">For Heschel, one must neither anesthetize God as did Greek philosophy, nor must one humanize God through anthropomorphism. This is why Heschel, concerning the latter, emphasizes that God’s pathos is not man’s pathos. It is here that many contemporary theologians fail to recognize the significance of what Heschel is actually saying. They consistently interpret Heschel’s idea that God’s pathos is not human pathos as indicating the similarity between God and man. Both God and man are characterized by pathos. In actual fact, Heschel uses the idea to emphasize the dissimilarity between God and man. God’s pathos <i class="calibre5">is not</i> man’s pathos, and therefore God is different from man. ‘The prophets had to use anthropomorphic language in order to convey his nonanthropomorphic Being…. It is precisely the challenge involved in using inadequate words that drives the mind beyond all <a id="page_67" class="calibre3"></a>words. Any pretension to adequacy would be specious and a delusion.’<sup class="calibre6">42</sup></p>
<p class="in">While I believe that there are ambiguities and tensions within Heschel’s understanding of divine pathos which allow contemporary theologians to use him for their own purposes, I also believe that the heart of what he wishes to say can be discerned, and that it is logically coherent. On the one hand, Heschel wishes to uphold the true biblical notion that God is attentive to human history and is intimately involved within the lives of human beings. He is not like the God of Greek philosophy. His pathos is expressed in his love, kindness, mercy and compassion – even to the point of speaking, as Heschel and the Bible do, of his grief and suffering. On the other hand, Heschel, equally faithful to biblical revelation, does not want such pathos to be conceived in an anthropomorphic manner, as if to attribute such characteristics of God, one were saying that God’s pathos – his love, compassion, grief and suffering – could be conceived in a psychological manner similar to that of humans. For Heschel, it is precisely the otherness of God’s pathos which gives it its true and full significance. This, I believe, is quite in conformity with what I have attempted to articulate in the present chapter. Through his immanent activity as the Creator, the Savior and the Sanctifier, God reveals, in these very immanent actions, that he is the One, All Holy God who transcends, and so is other than, the created and historical order. It is precisely the utterly transcendent component contained within these immanent actions that confers upon them their unique and unparalleled significance. Moreover, similar to Heschel, I stated in the body of the chapter that it is precisely the extravagant nature of God’s passion/pathos which reveals its transcendent, divine origin. Heschel, in his turn, is but using the prophetic concept of divine pathos as the heuristic tool for discerning and articulating this same understanding. It is the immanent expression of divine pathos that manifests its transcendent (‘superhuman’ and ‘nonanthropomorphic’) nature.<sup class="calibre6">43</sup></p>
<p class="in">While I am confident that this is Heschel’s true position, he is inconsistent in the manner in which he expresses it. The tension within Heschel resides in his often speaking, despite his later disclaimers, as if God’s pathos is similar to human pathos, that is, his pathos is not merely experienced by humans in a psychological and emotional manner, but it is also experienced within himself in a psychological and emotional manner, as if God undergoes psychological and emotional changes. Thus God psychologically and emotionally experiences suffering and grief. It is this that contemporary theologians have borrowed from Heschel, but it is an appropriation that I am not convinced he would, in the end, wholeheartedly approve. While Heschel and I may have some disagreements, in intent and even content, I believe that, on the whole, I have more in common with him than do those who employ him to espouse a passible notion of God.</p>
<p class="in"><a id="page_68" class="calibre3"></a>The heart of the problem is that Heschel does not possess, and so does not provide, a consistent philosophical account for how God’s pathos can be expressed within the created and historical order without it ceasing to be truly divine. I hope to provide such a philosophical account.</p>
<p class="ntcon">1  I believe this is one of the major weaknesses of those who propose a passible God. They do so without first adequately considering the more central issues of God’s nature and of his relationship to the created order. Thus, while their affirmation of a passible God seems clear, yet it ultimately throws into disarray the whole mystery of God and of his relationship to the created order.</p>
<p class="ntnlf">2  I will make reference to the New Testament only in so far as it illustrates or furthers a particular point from the Old Testament. I will treat the question of the Incarnation and redemption as they bear on the impassibility or passibility of God in later chapters.</p>
<p class="ntnlf">3  The Old Testament never actually addresses the question of whether God is impassible or passible. This is a philosophical question that arises out of the Old Testament revelation. In this chapter I wish first to discern the Old Testament notion of God, and then address the question of God’s impassibility and passibility from within this scriptural context.</p>
<p class="ntnl">For brief accounts of God in the Old Testament, see J.J. Scullion, ‘God in the Old Testament’ in <i class="calibre5">The Anchor Bible Dictionary</i>, ed. D.N. Freedman (New York: Doubleday, 1992), Vol. II, pp. 1041–48; and M. Rose, ‘Names of God in the Old Testament’, <i class="calibre5">ibid</i>., Vol. IV, pp. 1001–11; Kleinknecht, Quell, Stauffer, Kuhn, ‘Theos’ in <i class="calibre5">Theological Dictionary of the New Testament</i>, Vol. 3, ed. G. Kittel (Grand Rapids: Eerdmans, 1965), pp. 65–123; and Quell, Foerster, ‘Kyrios’, <i class="calibre5">ibid</i>., pp. 1039–98. For the New Testament understanding of God, see J.M. Bassler, ‘God in the New Testament,’ <i class="calibre5">The Anchor Bible Dictionary</i>, Vol. II, pp. 1049–55.</p>
<p class="ntnlf">4  In his excellent little book R. Bauckham argues that the Old Testament, especially the Second Temple theology, speaks not so much about the nature of God but of the revelation of God’s identity – who God is. See <i class="calibre5">God Crucified: Monotheism and Christology in the New Testament</i> (Carlisle: Paternoster Press, 1998), pp. 1–22.</p>
<p class="ntnlf">5  It will only be toward the end of this chapter that we will be able to say in what sense God is transcendent and immanent within the Hebrew scriptures. Therefore, I will avoid the use of the terms ‘transcendent,’ ‘transcendence,’ ‘immanent,’ and ‘immanence’ until I have clarified their true biblical meaning.</p>
<p class="ntnlf">6  It should be noted that the Hebrew people believed that the God whom they experienced, who related to them and acted in their midst, was God as he actually is, and not some abridged revelation of God tempered for human consumption.</p>
<p class="ntnlf">7  Since I am using almost exclusively either the <i class="calibre5">Revised Standard Version</i> or the <i class="calibre5">New Revised Standard Version</i> of the Bible, the Hebrew name for God – Yahweh – is rendered in small capitals and translated as L<small class="calibre11">ORD</small>.</p>
<p class="ntnlf">8  The pagan Greek gods, like the pagan gods encountered by the Israelites, while superior to human beings and so transcending them, lived and acted solely within the confines of history and time. However, as Greek philosophical thought developed and matured, the notion of there being only one God was established. Interestingly, similar to the growth in the Hebrew understanding of one God, the Greek philosophical notion more and more concluded that the one God was distinct from all else – the many. He was outside the confines of time and history and the finite order. However, in confirming this notion of one God, distinct from all else, the Greek philosophers also believed that he must be apart from all else. God, they believed, could only maintain his transcendent nature, and thus his true divinity, if he remained apart from and inaccessible to the finite realm. Thus, the one God of Greek philosophy either did not know that anything else existed and so never acted within the cosmos (Aristotle), or only related to it through lesser intermediaries – the <i class="calibre5">Demiurge, Nous</i>, or <i class="calibre5">Logos</i> (Platonism) – and so protected his transcendence. This Greek view of the one God’s transcendence never entered into the Hebrew understanding precisely because their understanding of God’s otherness arose from their experience of him actually acting in their midst, within time and history. It first entered into Jewish thought when contact was made with Greek philosophy. Having contaminated Jewish (and subsequently Christian) theology, it would take centuries to eradicate it completely, as the critics, seen in the first chapter, have zealously recorded. However, as I will argue at the appropriate places, the contamination was not as sweeping as they would suggest. To my mind the precise nature of the problem and the appropriate solution to it radically differ from their interpretation.</p>
<p class="ntnlf">9  Despite the christological context of the New Testament, it affirms the reality of the one and only God, who is the God of Israel. See, for example, 1 Cor. 8:4–6; Eph. 4:6; 1 Tim. 1:17, 2:5, 6:15; Rom. 3:30, 16:27; Jas 2:19; Jude 25. The God and Father of Jesus is the God of Abraham, Isaac and Jacob. This continuity is seen in that ‘Theos,’ as is well known, is applied almost exclusively to the Father. In affirming the one God of the Hebrew tradition, the New Testament equally affirms that he is distinct from all else that is. The coming of the kingdom in the person and action of Jesus is not due to human effort or the evolution of history, but, like the covenant of old, is due to the initiative, and so inbreaking, of God into time and history. Thus the New Testament strongly confirms the Old Testament belief that the one and only God who is immanent in time and history is equally distinct from time and history.</p>
<p class="ntull">10  For a brief account of God as Savior in the Old Testament, see C. Westermann, <i class="calibre5">What Does the Old Testament Say About God?</i> (London: SPCK, 1979), pp. 25–38.</p>
<p class="ntull">11  I am not entirely pleased with designating Yahweh as ‘the Wholly Other.’ First, it is not a biblical term, and so I hesitate to insert a non-biblical term within a biblical exegetical context in order to explain the biblical notion of God. Second, it could give the impression that I am inserting then some alien philosophical notion of God that is non-biblical. Third, designating Yahweh as ‘the Wholly Other’ could also give the impression that I mean that he is completely unlike everything else in every respect. This would be false since creation does testify to the existence of God (see Wis. 13:1–9; Sir. 17:8; Rom. 1:19–20), and human beings are created in God’s image and likeness (see Gen. 1:26–27). I have decided, nonetheless, to designate Yahweh as ‘the Wholly Other’ because I could find no other designation which clearly, succinctly, and singularly expressed the biblical notion that God cannot be numbered among the things created. In this sense, and in this sense only, do I mean that Yahweh is completely and absolutely other. As Creator Yahweh is not a creature, and so he is wholly other than the things created. To say that Yahweh is ‘the Wholly Other’ does not mean then, as I am using the phrase, that God is ‘other’ in the sense that he cannot be known, or that he is so ‘other’ that we cannot make true statements about him, or that he is so ‘other’ that he has no relationship with the created order. Nor do I want to imply that in calling God ‘the Wholly Other’ that he is impersonal. I merely wish to highlight the biblical teaching that God is unique because he exists, and so relates to the created order, in a manner that distinguishes and demarcates him from everything else. His singular identity is defined by his otherness from what he has created. G. Grisez states that if the term ‘wholly other,’ when applied to God, means that God ‘<i class="calibre5">cannot</i> be said to be whatever contingent entities are said to be, this expression is appropriate, but nothing is affirmed.’ <i class="calibre5">Beyond the New Theism</i> (Notre Dame: University of Notre Dame Press, 1975), p. 249. M. Henry also stresses that what distinguished the Israelites’ understanding of God from the polytheism of their Mesopotamian neighbors was his otherness from all else. See <i class="calibre5">On Not Understanding God</i> (Dublin: The Columba Press, 1997), pp. 79–85. Equally, R. Bauckham argues that the Hebrew notion of God as Creator, unlike non-Jewish thought which sees God as ‘the summit of a hierarchy’ or ‘the original source of a spectrum of divinity,’ accentuates ‘the absolute distinction between God and all else.’ <i class="calibre5">God Crucified</i>, p. 16. See also pp. 9–17.</p>
<p class="ntull">12  The Hebrew <i class="calibre5">bãrã</i> (word) appears forty-nine times in the Old Testament and is used exclusively for God. Eight of those times are within Genesis 1.</p>
<p class="ntull">13  While God as Creator is seen as distinct from all that he creates, only once does the Old Testament allude to the concept of <i class="calibre5">creatio ex nihilo</i>. ‘I beg you, my child, to look at the heaven and the earth and see everything that is in them, and recognize that God did not make them out of things that existed’ (2 Macc. 7:28). Nonetheless, such a notion lies within the Old Testament account of Yahweh creating all else, and thus, that there was nothing out of which God could fashion all else. Moreover, the emphasis on the creative capacity of God’s word specifies that it was by his will and power alone that all else came to be.</p>
<p class="ntull">14  For a brief account of God as Creator in the Old Testament see C. Westermann, <i class="calibre5">What Does the Old Testament Say About God?</i>, pp. 39–52. B.S. Childs speaks of the distinction between God and creation when he states: To say that God reveals himself in his creation is not to say that God is known through nature. To try to discover God by scanning the sun and the moon can just as easily lead to idolatry and superstition. Rather, the confession of the biblical writer is that God reveals himself as creator.’ <i class="calibre5">Old Testament Theology in a Canonical Context</i> (London: SCM, 1985), p. 31.</p>
<p class="ntnl">The New Testament also speaks of God as Creator (see Mk 13:19; Rom. 11:36; Eph. 3:9; 1 Tim. 6:13; and Rev. 4:11, 10:6, 14:7), and in so doing distinguishes him from all else that is. Bassler points out that God as Creator is especially evident in the prayers (see 4:24) and the speeches within Acts (see 14:15–17, 17:22–31). The speeches were primarily attempts at evangelizing the Greeks, and so attempting to confirm that the one God of the Greeks was also the Creator God who has now brought salvation in Jesus (see <i class="calibre5">The Anchor Bible Dictionary</i>, Vol. II, p. 1051).</p>
<p class="ntnl">The New Testament has two unique emphases concerning God as the Creator. Both are founded upon and anticipated within the Old Testament. The first is that the Father created through the Word/Son (see Jn 1:2–3; 1 Cor. 8:6; Col. 1:15–20; Heb. 1:1–3) and that the Father manifests his lifegiving power in the raising of Jesus from the dead by the Holy Spirit (see Acts 2:23, 32, 36; 3:13–17; 4:10; 5:30–31; 7:52; 10:39–40; 13:27–30; 17:31; 1 Thes. 1:10; 1 Cor. 6:14, 15:15; 2 Cor. 4:14; Gal. 1:1; Rom. 4:24, 10:9; 1 Pet. 1:21). Thus the Father will also raise to glory all who believe in his Son (see Rom. 6:5, 8:11; 1 Cor. 6:14, 15:20ff.; 2 Cor. 4:14, 13:4; Eph. 2:6; Col. 1:18; 2:12ff.; 1 Thes. 4:14; 2 Tim. 2:11). Christians, then, participate in a new birth (see 1 Pet. 1:3), a new creation (see 2 Cor. 5:17), a new life (see Rom. 6:4, Col. 2:12–13; Eph. 2:1), and so become a new man (see Eph. 2:15). This all finds its completion when the Father creates a new heaven and a new earth with the return of Jesus in glory (see Rev. 21:1–22:5). We see here that God as Creator and God as Savior are intimately intertwined in the New Testament, and that this unity finds its source in the unique person of Jesus and his saving work. We will discuss later the whole question of christology. Here I wish only to note again that all these historical saving actions of God through Jesus, especially in the resurrection, manifest his complete otherness, for no one from within the created order could do what God does, especially raise someone into glory and bring about a whole new created order at the end of time. The New Testament corroborates and enlarges the Old Testament notion that the God who creates and acts within the created order is completely other than the created order.</p>
<p class="ntnl">The Old and New Testament notion of God as active within the created order is utterly foreign to Greek theodicy. There are two reasons why Greek philosophy isolated God in his transcendence. The first, which is foundational, is that it had no perception of God as Creator. Not being Creator, God had no ‘natural’ bond to the finite realm. Within Neo-Platonic thought all emanated out from God, and while human beings therefore contained a ‘seed’ or ‘spark’ of God within them (the soul), yet the very notion of emanation meant that there was a constitutional gulf or chasm between God and that which emanated out from him. Second, Platonic thought viewed the finite realm itself as evil because it was mired in matter and so never fully conformed to the true good of the immutable ideal forms. God, therefore, needed to remain aloof from the finite lest he be contaminated by the depravity of matter. The biblical notion of creation, in contrast, confirmed both the otherness of God from creation and simultaneously his ‘natural’ bond with creation since he was its Creator and Sustainer. Moreover, since it was the good God who is Creator, the whole of creation was created good, even matter. Clearly, the notion of God as Creator is absolutely crucial for confirming both the otherness of God from the created order and his indispensable intrinsic relationship to it.</p>
<p class="ntull">15  For a similar interpretation of the biblical notion of God’s holiness see: W. Pannenberg, <i class="calibre5">Basic Questions in Theology</i>, Vol. 1, pp. 154–55; and his <i class="calibre5">Systematic Theology</i>, Vol. 1 (Grand Rapids: Eerdmans, 1991), pp. 398–400. Nonetheless, Pannenberg equally, and I think inconsistently, espouses that the All Holy God is mutable and passible.</p>
<p class="ntull">16  For descriptions of the lifelessness and nothingness of idols and false gods, see Is. 40:19–20; 41:6–7, 23–24; 42:17; 43:10–13; 44:9–20; 46:1–13; 48:5. The New Testament has a similar understanding (see 1 Thes. 1:9; Acts 14:15; Rom. 1:23; 1 Cor. 8:4–6).</p>
<p class="ntull">17  The refrain ‘I am the L<small class="calibre11">ORD</small>, and there is no other’ pervades throughout the whole of Chapter 45. See 45:6, 14, 21, 22; also 46:9.</p>
<p class="ntull">18  While I have focused on Yahweh being One, Savior, Creator and All Holy, there are other aspects which re-enforce the understanding expressed here. For example, while the Psalms extol the mighty and loving works of Yahweh and praise him for them, yet these reveal his singular greatness (see Ps. 77:11–15). The Book of Job portrays Yahweh as the fount of wisdom and knowledge. As the author of all he needs no counsel or teaching (see Job 38–41). The Wisdom literature equally asserts that wisdom finds its source in God alone. Moreover, the names ascribed to God in the Old Testament also manifest his uniqueness. El-Elyôn (God Most High), EI-’Olam (Everlasting God), Shaddai (Almighty), Abir (Mighty One), Adônai (Lord), Yahweh Sabaoth (L<small class="calibre11">ORD</small> of Hosts) all denote Yahweh’s otherness from the created order and simultaneously his presence and activity within it. This is especially seen in the divine name Yahweh.</p>
<p class="ntnl">As I noted earlier Moses’ request that God reveal his name served a twofold purpose. Since names were indicative of one’s ‘nature,’ to know God’s name was to obtain a knowledge of him. Moreover, it allowed the knower of the name to call upon him and so have access to him. God in revealing his name to Moses and the Hebrew people granted them privileged knowledge of him and the ability to call upon him. Scholars debate the exact meaning of the name Yahweh, but they are agreed that it derives from the Hebrew verb ‘to be’ (<i class="calibre5">hawah</i>). ‘<i class="calibre5">ehyeh ‘asher ‘ehyeh</i> can then be translated as either ‘I am he who is’ or ‘I am the one who exists.’ The Greek Septuagint translated it as ‘I am who am’ (<i class="calibre5">ego eimi ho on</i>). Thus, God in revealing his name Yahweh, manifests both that he is with his people, since they know his name, and that he is present as the unknowable or unnameable. As ‘He who is’ God remains ‘the mystery’ – the Wholly Other – in their midst. S. Terrien prefers to translate the divine name as ‘I shall be whoever I shall be’, but concludes:</p>
<p class="bq1f">According to this interpretation, the name indeed carries the connotation of divine presence, but it also confers upon this presence a quality of elusiveness. The God of biblical faith, even in the midst of a theophany, is at once <i class="calibre5">Deus revelatus atque absconditus</i>. He is known as unknown. <i class="calibre5">The Elusive Presence: Toward a New Biblical Theology</i> (San Francisco: Harper &amp; Row, 1978), p. 119. See pp. 106–19.</p>
<p class="ntnl">J.C. Murray in his classic study on the divine name argues that the Hebrew people themselves would have understood the name ‘Yahweh’ to mean: ‘I shall be there as who I am shall I be there.’ ‘The text, thus understood, contains a threefold revelation – of God’s immanence in history, of his transcendence to history, and of his transparence through history.’ <i class="calibre5">The Problem of God</i> (New Haven: Yale University Press, 1964), p. 10. See pp. 5–30.</p>
<p class="ntnl">For other studies see, ‘YHWH’ in <i class="calibre5">The Theological Dictionary of the Old Testament</i>, eds. G.J. Botterwick and H. Ringgren (Grand Rapids: Eerdmans, 1986), Vol. 5, pp. 500–21; ‘Names of God in the Old Testament’ in <i class="calibre5">The Anchor Bible Dictionary</i>, Vol. 4, pp. 1602–11; W. Kasper, <i class="calibre5">The God of Jesus Christ</i> (New York: Crossroad, 1984), p. 148.</p>
<p class="ntnl">The New Testament takes up similar names for God. He is almighty (see Rev. 1:8); the Lord of Hosts (see Rom. 9:29, Jas 5:4); the Most High (see Lk 1:32, 35, 76, 8:28; Mk 5:7); the Sovereign (see 1 Tim. 6:15; Rev. 6:10); the Mighty One (Lk 1:49); Lord of lords and King of kings (see 1 Tim. 1:17; 6:15; Rev. 15:3); the Lord of heaven and earth (see Rev. 11:4; Mt 11:25). As with the names and titles for God in the Old Testament so these too highlight both his relationship to the created order and his distinctiveness from it.</p>
<p class="ntull">19  The philosophical issue of divine causality will be treated in <a href="13_Chapter06.xhtml" class="calibre3">Chapter 6</a>. However, it would be good to state here that the biblical notion of Yahweh and of his relationships to the created order as Creator, Savior, and Sanctifier demand an understanding of causality that is unique to him. Actually, it is this unique causality of Yahweh which establishes him relationally as Creator, Savior and Sanctifier. Yahweh is Creator precisely because he is not a cause within the created realm, for he establishes the existence of the created order, and thus is necessarily related to it as one who is not of it. Moreover, his actions as Savior manifest that he is not wholly determined or causally constrained and restrained by physical/natural laws, or political conditions, or economic circumstances, but rather, being free from such constraints, he is able to act independently of them and so save and redeem even in the midst of such laws, conditions, and circumstances. Likewise, he is able to sanctify as the All Holy God, for, while he abides in the midst of a sinful people and world, he is not enmeshed within it. It is this singular causal ability as Creator, Savior and Sanctifier that constitutes Yahweh’s immanent presence and activity as the Wholly Other. While the Hebrew scriptures (and the New Testament) testify to such causality, they, somewhat surprisingly, never comment on it other than to assume that Yahweh does what he does because he is God and so can do it. But are not the scriptures a narration of God’s revelation, and not a philosophical treatise on it? He leaves it up to us to figure out, philosophically, <i class="calibre5">how</i> he does what he does, and it would be philosophically erroneous to conclude, in attempting to grasp <i class="calibre5">how</i> God acts, that he cannot do what the Bible reveals that he does.</p>
<p class="ntull">20  How this is philosophically the case will be demonstrated in <a href="13_Chapter06.xhtml" class="calibre3">Chapters 6</a> and <a href="14_Chapter07.xhtml" class="calibre3">7</a>.</p>
<p class="ntull">21  Despite all of the criticism of Greek philosophy, those theologians who conceive God’s transcendence in opposition to his immanence and so wish to deprive God of some of his transcendence in order to make him immanent are actually working from within a Greek understanding of transcendence. Within Platonic thought, for God to be transcendent meant that he was not only other than the created order, but also far from it. God could not be both transcendent and immanent simultaneously for to be immanent would jeopardize his transcendence. While many contemporary philosophers and theologians rightly wish to make God immanent, in contrast to the Platonic understanding, they are nonetheless still working from within the Platonic understanding of transcendence in that they believe God cannot be wholly transcendent and yet immanent at the same time. Their solution is to make God less transcendent and therefore more immanent, but in so doing they do what the Greeks feared – make God less than God. It is not surprising, as we already saw, that in their attempt to make God more immanent many contemporary theologians argue for a panentheistic notion of God which, in the end, differs little from pantheism itself. This is hardly the biblical view of God. As J.C. Murray states: ‘The Israelite world-view was never touched by any taint of pantheism. However seductive to the philosopher, pantheism was no temptation to the people whose sense of God as the Holy One made pantheism unthinkable’ (<i class="calibre5">The Problem of God</i>, p. 20). What many contemporary theologians have not grasped, which is the central issue of this chapter, is that the biblical understanding demands that God be present to and active within the created order as he truly is, as the Wholly Other, and that he be present and active precisely because he is the Wholly Other. For the Bible, God is transcendent not in the sense that he is far away from or inaccessible to the created order, but only that he is wholly other than the created order and is related to and active within the created order as the Wholly Other. M. Henry writes:</p>
<p class="bq1f">It is because his [God’s] otherness from his creation is of such a unique kind that he can be present to, or immanent in, his creation in a unique way…. In other words, it is actually – paradoxical though it may sound – God’s transcendence that makes him relevant to the world rather than remote from the world. It is his transcendence that allows him to overcome and not be restricted by the world’s differences, and to be present to, or immanent in, creation in a unique way. <i class="calibre5">On Not Understanding God</i>, p. 91.</p>
<p class="ntull">22  Using the notion of holiness as an example, T.E. Fretheim writes concerning God’s immanence and transcendence:</p>
<p class="bq1f">Perhaps the phrase, ‘in your midst is the Holy One’ (Is. 12:6; Hos. 11:9) can assist us here. This phrase indicates that holiness, one important biblical word for speaking of transcendence, and presence do not stand opposed to one another. It is probably also true to say that the language of polarity does not capture the sense either, as if holiness and presence stood in some tension with each other. Rather, it is <i class="calibre5">as</i> the Holy One that God is present…. The transcendence of God is thus manifested by the <i class="calibre5">way in which</i> God is present among his people. It is not just that any God or God in some attenuated form is present among the people, it is the Holy God, a God who does great things…. And this God <i class="calibre5">is</i> present – not some emanation of God, nor some bits and pieces of God, but God in all of God’s Godness is present. <i class="calibre5">The Suffering of God: An Old Testament Perspective</i>, pp. 70–71. See also p. 38.</p>
<p class="ntnl">While I agree with Fretheim here, he does, nonetheless argue throughout his book that God does change and is passible. As I will argue later, this does seem to undermine the ‘Godness’ of God and so the significance of the one who is truly in our midst.</p>
<p class="ntull">23  B.S. Childs writes: ‘His [God’s] transcendence does not undercut his immanence, nor his mysterious otherness his gracious presence’. <i class="calibre5">Old Testament Theology in a Canonical Context</i>, p. 41.</p>
<p class="ntull">24  Some scripture scholars speak of God’s revelation of himself in the Old Testament in terms of ‘disclosure’ and ‘hiddenness’ rather than in terms of ‘transcendence’ and ‘immanence.’ While God discloses who he is, yet he does so as to remain hidden for he is always more than contained in the revelation of himself. As B.S. Childs states: ‘God both reveals and conceals his identity to Israel. What first seems to be the divine form itself soon emerges as only his outward manifestation: his “glory”, “messenger” or “face”,’ <i class="calibre5">Old Testament Theology in a Canonical Context</i>, p. 41. S. Terrien’s entire study, <i class="calibre5">The Elusive Presence: Toward a New Biblical Theology</i>, develops this theme. ‘The reality of the presence of God stands at the center of biblical faith. This presence, however, is always elusive’ (p. xxvii). He continues:</p>
<p class="bq1f">Alone in their cultural milieu, the Hebrews developed a unique theology of presence. They worshipped a God whose disclosure or proximity always had a certain quality of elusiveness. Indeed, for most generations of the biblical age, Israel prayed to a <i class="calibre5">Deus Absconditus</i>.</p>
<p class="ntnl">Terrien notes that the Hebrew original of this expression means ‘a self-concealing God’ (Is. 45:15), (p. 1). To speak of God’s ‘disclosure’ and ‘hiddenness’ may be more in keeping with biblical language, yet I believe such terms are not contrary to speaking of God’s transcendence and immanence. If properly understood, the later terms give more philosophical clarity to the biblical proclamation.</p>
<p class="ntull">25  To attempt to make the mystery of God’s transcendence and immanence comprehensible is to transform it into a problem as I described in the second chapter. This, I believe, is one of the mistakes made by those theologians who argue for God’s passibility. They may make the mystery comprehensible, but in so doing destroy the mystery itself and thus distort both God and his relationship to the created order.</p>
<p class="ntnl">That the incomprehensibility of God, and so his mystery, is the basis for any authentic discussion of impassibility, see P. Groves’ D.Phil. dissertation, <i class="calibre5">Ineffability and Divine Impassibility</i> (University of Oxford, 1995).</p>
<p class="ntull">26  For an exposition and critique of Heschel’s understanding of divine ‘pathos,’ see the Addendum to this chapter.</p>
<p class="ntull">27  See Fretheim, <i class="calibre5">The Suffering of God</i>, pp. 107–48.</p>
<p class="ntull">28  Heschel makes the same point. See <i class="calibre5">The Prophets</i>, pp. 270–72. I discuss this in the Addendum. S.D. Goitein argues that the divine name Yahweh should actually be translated as: ‘I shall love passionately whom I love.’ See ‘<i class="calibre5">YHWH</i> The Passionate: The Monotheistic Meaning and Origin of the Name <i class="calibre5">YHWH,’ Vetus Testamentum</i> 6 (1956):1–9.</p>
<p class="ntull">29  R. Rice criticizes such an interpretation as being unfaithful to the intent of the texts, that is, that God does actually change his mind (see <i class="calibre5">The Openness of God</i>, pp. 26–29. Also see p. 33 for Rice’s interpretation of what it means for God not to change his mind.</p>
<p class="ntull">30  In his <i class="calibre5">Divine Immutability: A Critical Reconsideration</i>, I.A. Dorner may have been the first theologian to argue that the biblical notion of God expresses an ethical understanding of his immutability and not an ontological understanding. God remains immutable in his self-identity as the all-loving God and changes in his vital and active relationship to human history.</p>
<p class="bq1f"><i class="calibre5">This self-identity and ethical immutability are precisely the reason that he does not always behave in a simply identical way toward mutable humankind</i>, but that change enters both into his act and even into his attitude toward humanity. According to the Old Testament (as well as to the New Testament), it is not that through sin only the relation of men to God is altered while God’s relation to men remains simply the same. To be sure, the latter has a self-identity in that it contains the purely ethical character; but this ethical immutability, in its living relation to each moment of creaturely life, to its value or disvalue, is the basis of continual alterations in the way in which God is disposed toward mutable man (p. 180). See also pp. 160–95.</p>
<p class="ntnl">Many others have since followed Dorner’s lead. For example, K. Barth acknowledges his indebtedness to him (see <i class="calibre5">Church Dogmatics</i> II/1, p. 493). Barth argues at length that God’s immutability consists in his constancy in that God is always faithful to who he is in his divine freedom, love and life. Thus the biblical notion of God portrays God as constantly changing in accordance with historical and human situations – he becomes angry and repents – and yet all of these changes bear witness to his constancy and faithfulness. ‘His constancy consists in the fact that he is always the same in every change’ (<i class="calibre5">ibid</i>., p. 496). Thus ‘God’s constancy – which is a better word than the suspiciously negative word “immutability” – is the constancy of his knowing, willing and acting and therefore of his person’ (<i class="calibre5">ibid</i>., p. 495). See <i class="calibre5">ibid</i>., pp. 490–512.</p>
<p class="ntnl">Similarly, Rem B. Edwards states: ‘There is an infinite conceptual difference between the claim that (1) God does not change <i class="calibre5">with respect to his goodness or righteousness</i> (which was the Biblical view of the perfection and unchangeableness of God) and the claim that (2) God does not change <i class="calibre5">in any conceivable respect whatsoever</i> (which was the Greek view of the nature of divine perfection),’ ‘The Pagan Dogma of the Absolute Unchangeableness of God’, <i class="calibre5">Religious Studies</i> 14 (1978):306.</p>
<p class="ntnl">See also Brasnett, <i class="calibre5">The Suffering of the Impassible God</i>, pp. 6, 14, 18, 91–98; Fretheim, <i class="calibre5">The Suffering of God</i>, p. 31; Küng, <i class="calibre5">The Incarnation of God</i>, p. 533; Pannenberg, <i class="calibre5">Basic Questions in Theology</i>, Vol. 2, pp. 161–62, 180, and his <i class="calibre5">Systematic Theology</i>, Vol. 1, pp. 436–38; Pollard, ‘The Impassibility of God,’ 360; Rice, <i class="calibre5">The Openness of God</i>, pp. 46–50; Swinburne, <i class="calibre5">The Coherence of Theism</i>, pp. 219–23; T.F. Torrance, <i class="calibre5">The Christian Doctrine of God</i>, pp. 235–46; van Beeck, ‘This Weakness of God’s is Stronger,’ p. 11; and Ward, <i class="calibre5">Religion and Creation</i>, pp. 186–91.</p>
<p class="ntnl">The obvious motivation behind these theologians is to maintain both God’s goodness and love, and his vital interaction with and in the world. Ethical immutability seems to allow both and there is no doubt that Yahweh is revealed within the Hebrew scriptures as ethically immutable. However, by making God merely ethically immutable, it is difficult to see what is the metaphysical foundation for his immutable goodness and love. These are merely posited because God always acts in a perfectly good manner; but why does he always so act? By denying the ontological unchangeable perfection of God, his goodness and love are no longer truly rooted in what God actually <i class="calibre5">is</i>. While I will discuss this more fully later, must he not be ethically immutable in his love and goodness, because he is ontologically unchangeable in his perfection? As von Balthasar has stated:</p>
<p class="bq1f">Such forms of the eternal divine life as mercy, patience, and so on, can be understood on the analogy of human emotions, but this must not involve attributing ‘mutability’ to God. Nor is it correct – and many Catholic theologians have followed Protestant theologians in this – to restrict God’s immutability to his attitude of covenant faithfulness within the dispensation he has established: the Bible, in both Old and New Testaments, looks <i class="calibre5">through</i> his attitude and discerns beyond it a quality of the Divinity as such. <i class="calibre5">Theo-Drama V</i>, p. 226.</p>
<p class="ntnl">Moreover, to make God ontologically mutable may disallow him to do things that he also is revealed to do – like being the All Holy Creator and Savior. As we will see, by making God merely ethically immutable, these and similar theologians cannot adequately address other philosophical and revelational issues involving God.</p>
<p class="ntnl">It should also be noted that I have not discussed the two classic references to God’s unchangeability – Malachi 3:6 (’I the L<small class="calibre11">ORD</small> do not change’) and James 1:17 (’Every generous act of giving, with every perfect gift, is from above, coming down from the Father of lights, with whom there is no variation or shadow due to change.’) The reason is that I did not wish to base my argument, as has been done in the past, on a couple of ‘proof texts,’ but rather on the whole of the Old Testament revelation of who God is. Moreover, these texts could be interpreted, as is now normally the case, as expressing God’s ethical goodness, that is, his unchanging faithfulness. This may be the correct interpretation, but the real issue is not just how these passages are interpreted, but rather what is the ground in which God’s unchanging faithfulness is rooted.</p>
<p class="ntnl">It should be noted as well that those who argue for a passible understanding of God have their own set of biblical ‘proof texts.’ The problem is that they also interpret these texts too narrowly and so do not interpret them within the context of the whole of biblical revelation of who God is. By attempting to place the biblical notion of God within the entire context of the Bible, I have tried to avoid this narrow interpretation of ‘proof texts’ as has been done in the past for the impassibility of God and is now being done in the present for his passibility.</p>
<p class="ntull">31  My biblical interpretation has consistently pushed the argument for supporting the ontological impassibility of God to the limits, but I have tried hard not to allow my interpretation to exceed the biblical warrant and so slip into philosophy. Because of this, while my biblical arguments, I believe, lead to, support, and will ultimately demand a God who is ontologically impassible and not just ethically unchangeable, they do not absolutely prove this. The reason is simply that, while biblical revelation cannot be contradicted and while it can govern, support, and even demand specific philosophical orientations and interpretations, of itself it cannot answer the philosophical issues that arise from but are not fully addressed by it.</p>
<p class="ntull">32  For example, see <i class="calibre5">The Prophets</i>, pp. 221–23, 231.</p>
<p class="ntull">33  <i class="calibre5">The Prophets</i>, p. 224.</p>
<p class="ntull">34  <i class="calibre5">The Prophets</i>, p. 226. See p. 225. Because of God’s intimate relationship to humankind, Heschel is critical of referring to God as ‘the Wholly Other.’ He interprets such a designation as implying a ‘strange, weird, uncanny Being, shrouded in unfathomable darkness.’ Such a God would be ‘the Remote One’ and ‘the Silent One’ (pp. 226–28). While I agree that such an interpretation can be given to the phrase ‘the Wholly Other.’ yet I do not think that such an interpretation is necessitated by the concept itself. I too would want to exclude from this designation those characteristics that Heschel gives to it. I have attempted to use it only to specify that God is distinct from, and so other than, the created order, something that Heschel would himself uphold.</p>
<p class="ntull">35  See <i class="calibre5">The Prophets</i>, pp. 232–35, 247–67. It should be said that much of Heschel’s critique of the various Greek philosophical understandings of God and their notion of apathy is not only correct but also insightful. The difficulty is in his not properly discerning how Christian and Jewish theologians, while using the same ‘Greek’ vocabulary, have radically transformed the meaning of such words in the light of the biblical revelation. I will attempt to demonstrate this in subsequent chapters.</p>
<p class="ntnl">In the light of the Hebrew understanding of divine pathos, Heschel is equally critical of other non-biblical notions of God, such as the Tao, Karma, Moira, and the Greek pagan gods. See pp. 235–46.</p>
<p class="ntull">36  <i class="calibre5">The Prophets</i>, p. 259. This biblical notion of God is incompatible with the conception of God as a Supreme Being who is unmoved and unchangeable. See pp. 260–67.</p>
<p class="ntull">37  <i class="calibre5">The Prophets</i>, p. 270.</p>
<p class="ntull">38  <i class="calibre5">The Prophets</i>, p. 270.</p>
<p class="ntull">39  <i class="calibre5">The Prophets</i>, p. 270.</p>
<p class="ntull">40  <i class="calibre5">The Prophets</i>, p. 270.</p>
<p class="ntull">41  <i class="calibre5">The Prophets</i>, p. 271. See pp. 272–74.</p>
<p class="ntull">42  <i class="calibre5">The Prophets</i>, p. 276. See pp. 274–78.</p>
<p class="ntull">43  H.U. von Balthasar interprets Heschel in a similar manner. He states that Heschel’s understanding of divine pathos has ‘nothing whatever to do with any mythological suffering, dying and rising God’ (<i class="calibre5">Theo-Drama IV: The Action</i>, pp. 343–44, fn. 20)</p>
</body>
</html>
