<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en-US">
  <head>
    <title>Does God Suffer?</title>
    <link href="../styles/page-template.xpgt" rel="stylesheet" type="application/vnd.adobe-page-template+xml"/>
    <meta content="urn:uuid:e0000000-0000-0000-0000-000004626051" name="Adept.expected.resource"/>
    <meta http-equiv="Content-Type" content="text/html; charset=utf-8"/>
  <link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="../../stylesheet.css"/>
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="../../page_styles.css"/>
</head>
  <body class="calibre">
<p class="cta"><a id="page_69" class="calibre2"></a><a href="06_Contents.xhtml#ch4" id="ch4" class="calibre2">4</a></p>
<p class="cs"><a href="06_Contents.xhtml#ch4" class="calibre2">Bridges to the Patristic Doctrine of God</a></p>
<p class="pn">In the previous chapter we examined the biblical, primarily the Hebrew, notion of God. We stressed that the Hebrew scriptures portray Yahweh as the All Holy Creator and Savior. As such he is wholly other than all else that exists, and yet, precisely because he is the Creator and Savior, he is present to the created order and active within time and history. In this chapter we will examine two ‘bridges’ to the Fathers and to the subsequent Christian tradition, that is, (1) those passages about God within the New Testament which contain within them a philosophical character; and (2) Philo of Alexandria’s understanding of God. This chapter will then set the religious context and philosophical milieu out of which the early church developed its own doctrine of God and of his relationship to the created order.</p>
<p class="sec"><b class="calibre8">New Testament Bridges</b></p>
<p class="pn">The New Testament is not devoid of words and concepts that are also common among ancient philosophy. Grant notes that the New Testament contains “‘bridges” toward philosophical doctrines of God.’<sup class="calibre6">1</sup></p>
<p class="in">These ‘bridges’ cluster around the New Testament’s evangelistic and apologetic appeal to the Gentiles that the true God is the One Creator God. Echoing the Book of Wisdom, Paul states that the pagans have no excuse for not knowing God. ‘Ever since the creation of the world his eternal/everlasting (ἀίδιος) power (δύναμις) and divine nature (θειότης), invisible (ἀόρατα) though they are, have been understood and seen through the things he has made’ (Rom. 1:20; see Wis. 13:1–9; Sir. 17:8). Visible creation itself testifies to the power of the everlasting divine nature both of which are invisible. The pagans had ‘exchanged the glory of the immortal (ἀϕθἀρτου) God for images resembling a mortal (ϕθαρτου̑) human being’ (Rom. 1:23). In the Pauline First Letter to Timothy, God is called ‘the King of the ages, immortal (ἀϕθάρτῳ), invisible (ἀοράτῳ), the only God’ (1 Tim. 1:17). Equally in Acts, when the Lycaonians declared <a id="page_70" class="calibre3"></a>Paul and Barnabas to be gods (Zeus and Hermes respectively), due to the healing of a cripple, Paul protested that they were only mortal, and that the people should instead ‘turn from worthless things to the living God, who made the heaven and the earth and the sea and all that is in them’ (Acts 14:15). Moreover, it is this living God who governs the heavens and the seasons of the year (see Acts 14:16). Similarly, in Paul’s famous speech in the Areopagus he declared to the Athenians a knowledge of ‘an unknown god’ who ‘made the world and everything in it, he who is Lord of heaven and earth’ and so does not live in shrines made by human hands, nor then, ‘is he served by human hands, as though he needed anything, since he himself gives to all mortals life and breath and all things’ (Acts 17:23–25). Moreover, in 1 Corinthians 8:4–6, Paul contrasts the unreality of the many pagan gods with the reality of the one God. While he quotes the <i class="calibre5">Shema</i> of Deuteronomy 6:4, the one God of the Judeo/Christian faith is nonetheless a ‘bridge’ to the one God of contemporary Greek philosophy. This one God is the Father ‘from whom are all things and for whom we exist, and one Lord, Jesus Christ through whom are all things and through whom we exist.’ Romans 11:36 also declares that all things are ‘from,’ ‘through’ and ‘to’ God. It is as Creator that God manifests his inscrutable wisdom and knowledge, and therefore no one can give to him something that he does not already possess (see vv. 33–35). Equally, God has given us ‘all things that pertain to life and godliness,’ and in contrast to the perishability of this life, Christians come to share in the divine nature, which, it is presumed, is imperishable (2 Pet. 1:4, see 1 Pet. 1:3–6).</p>
<p class="in">Even the Gospels seem to appeal to a common cultural philosophic view of God. Only the one God is good (see Mk 19:18; Mt 19:17; Lk 18:19). Human beings are called to be perfect as God himself is perfect (see Mt 5:48); the implication being that God is all perfect.</p>
<p class="in">The above passages are attempting to do a number of things simultaneously, some stressing one aspect more than another. First, there is the contrast between the many ‘dead’ and ‘unreal’ gods with the one living God of the Judeo/Christian tradition. This contrast not only undercuts the popular Greco-Roman pagan religion, but simultaneously provides a ‘bridge’ to Platonic and Aristotelian philosophy. It is an apologetic appeal which severs what is utterly false and, simultaneously, provides a link with what is basically true – there are not many gods, but only one God.</p>
<p class="in">Before proceeding to the second point, I would like to make a small digression. Since we will be noting some of the similarities and dissimilarities between the scriptural and Greek notions of God and of his relationship to the world, both in this and later chapters, it would be good at this point to outline briefly their respective understandings of God and of his relation to the world.</p>
<p class="in">Scholars debate whether or not Plato conceived God as personal. ‘The Good’ is at the apex of his metaphysical hierarchy, and it would seem to denote the supreme metaphysical principle rather than a personal being. The ‘Demiurge’, on the other hand, is often spoken of in personal terms. He is perfect in every way (and so unchanging, for to change would be change for the worse), and is the intermediary between the Good (and the realm of the ideal Forms) and the finite realm. As such he can be seen <a id="page_71" class="calibre3"></a>as Plato’s ‘God’. However, he is not the Creator, but ‘the Maker’ or ‘Reason’ who orders and fashions pre-existent chaotic matter so as to conform it to the eternal Forms or Ideas. At times then the Demiurge is seen almost as impersonal Reason (Nous) immanent within the world conforming it to the ideal Forms. Whether the Demiurge is envisaged as a personal being or as an impersonal metaphysical principle, he is nonetheless, as an intermediary, subject to and controlled by both the eternal Good (and all lesser Forms and Ideas) and by pre-existent matter. (On the above see Plato’s <i class="calibre5">Timaeus</i>.) Because Plato perceives matter as ‘evil,’ since it never conforms fully to the transcendent Forms or Ideas (the Good), and thus to the Truth, there is a chasm between ‘God’ or ‘the Good’ and everything else, that is, between the realm of immutable Goodness and Truth and the ever-changing realm of becoming. The relationship between the unchanging ideal realm of the eternal Forms and the changing world of matter is, therefore, always problematic for Plato.</p>
<p class="in">For Aristotle God is absolutely perfect, and so unchanging since he need not change for the better and cannot change for the worse. He is defined as ‘Self-Thinking Thought’ for ‘thinking’ is the highest expression of being and the most perfect thing he could think about is himself. Thus God knows nothing outside of himself since he would then be thinking of that which is imperfect, which would be unbecoming of the most perfect being. Aristotle never addressed the question of creation, but he was concerned about how pre-existent matter could be set in motion since it is mere potency. How does the process of going from potency to act begin and continue? Matter is set in motion, and so actuates its potential, by being attracted by the immutable perfection of God. God is the Unmoved Mover in that he sets in motion all else, not by an action on his part, but by his mere perfect and unchangeable presence as the Final Cause, the perfect attraction which draws all else to become as he is. He is like a transcendent ‘Big Mac’ that attracts the hungry (the world) into action so as to obtain it. Being the Final Cause, God is present to the world, but only as that which attracts the world. He himself is not conscious of the world nor does he act within the world for to do so would jeopardize his immutable perfection. (On the above see Aristotle’s <i class="calibre5">Metaphysics</i>, Book XII.)</p>
<p class="in">While the Neoplatonism of Plotinus (c. <small class="calibre10">AD</small>205–70) comes after the period we are considering here in this chapter, it would be good, for the sake of completeness, to briefly summarize it as well. Plotinus sees the One as the unknowable source of all else. The Nους (Intelligence) and Soul emanate out from the One as do all the lesser beings. Thus, while all other beings are related to the One in so far as they emanate out from the One, nonetheless, precisely because they do emanate out from the One, there is a chasm or gulf between the One and the lesser emanations.<sup class="calibre6">2</sup></p>
<p class="in"><a id="page_72" class="calibre3"></a>As we will see Philo and the Fathers also maintain that God is other than all else (transcendent), that he is unchanging in his absolute perfection, and therefore, that he cannot undergo passionate changes, such as sorrow, anger, and suffering. However, Philo and, to a greater degree, the Fathers (some more than others) will radically transform this Hellenic view of God. The catalyst for this ‘baptism,’ as will become evident, is the biblical view of the act of creation. As Creator, God must be personal and have a relationship to the world and, being perfectly good, he must be concerned about and active within his creation. How God can be unchangeable and impassible in his perfection, and yet be the Creator in all that this entails is obviously the question at hand.</p>
<p class="in">Second, the vocabulary and concepts that are used to form the bridge between the Christian proclamation of the one God and that of philosophy are often similar. Akin to much Greek philosophical thought, the Christian God is one, invisible, imperishable, all powerful, all perfect, all good, and everlasting or eternal.<sup class="calibre6">3</sup></p>
<p class="in">However, third, it is precisely the notion of God as being the Creator that sets the Judeo/Christian God apart from traditional Hellenic philosophy. In contrast to Plato and Aristotle, the one God of the Judeo/Christian faith is the Father, ‘from whom are all things and for whom we exist, and one Lord, Jesus Christ, through whom are all things and through whom we exist’ (1 Cor. 8:6). Unlike any Greek philosophy, God the Father is the Creator from whom all receive their existence, and this existence comes through Jesus Christ. Moreover, as Creator, the Father is neither far from nor disinterested in the finite realm, nor is Jesus then the cosmic intermediary who unites the cosmos to the divine realm. Rather, Jesus is the Word through whom and in whom the Father calls creation into existence (see Jn 1:1–5; Heb. 1:1–3; 1 Cor. 8:6; Col. 1:15–20).</p>
<p class="in">Fourth, all the attributes predicated of God focus on his being the Creator. It is because he is the invisible Creator that he possesses imperishability, absolute perfection and goodness, and all power; and he needs to possess them if he is to be the Creator. There is here a significant difference between the Greek view of God and his attributes and the Christian view of God and his attributes. Within Greek thought these attributes constitute God as one who is removed from, even if related to, all else that is. They constitute him as transcendent in the sense of not only making him other than the cosmic order, but also as often being incapable of actively relating to the cosmic order. Within the Judeo/Christian tradition these attributes do constitute God as wholly other than all else, but they equally constitute him as Creator and so immediately related to all else that is.</p>
<p class="in">Thus, in contrast to creation, God is all-powerful, invisible, everlasting, and imperishable. In the light of these attributes these passages note that God is therefore in need of nothing since all depend on him for <a id="page_73" class="calibre3"></a>their very existence and all the gifts that flow from it. It is only a small philosophical step to conclude that God is therefore absolutely perfect in his goodness, but his perfection is founded not upon his withdrawal from the world, but upon his ability to create as found in the Hebrew tradition. Here we find both a contrast and a ‘bridge’ to Greek philosophy. While both the New Testament and Platonic/Aristotelian philosophy would hold that God is perfect, the New Testament upholds this attribute because God must be perfect as the Creator of a good world, whereas Greek philosophy tends to hold that God is perfect because he is removed from the imperfect world of materiality. Equally, while both Platonic and Aristotelian thought would agree that God and his power are everlasting and invisible, what is different is that what is invisible (the everlasting God and his power) is manifested in the visible effects of God’s power – creation.</p>
<p class="in">It is the concept of creation then, with its one Creator God, that separates Christianity from popular pagan religion, and offers a bridge to Greek philosophy, but a bridge that simultaneously conveys the Greek God from Athens to Jerusalem and, in the crossing, baptizes him into the likeness of the God of Israel.</p>
<p class="in">Finally, there is one further significant point that must be grasped. The New Testament proclaims that Jesus, the Son, is also the Creator along with the Father. Moreover, it intrinsically joins the notion of Jesus as Creator with that of his equally being the supreme revelation of the Father. Jesus himself, as Creator and Revealer, can be seen, not as a linguistic or conceptual ‘bridge’ to Greek philosophy, but as a personal ‘bridge.’</p>
<p class="bq1">In the beginning was the Word [Logos], and the Word was with God, and the Word was God. He was in the beginning with God, and without him not one thing came into being…. And the Word became flesh and lived among us, and we have seen his glory, the glory as a father’s only son….No one has ever seen God. It is God the only Son, who is close to the Father’s heart, who has made him known. Jn 1:1–3, 14, 18.</p>
<p class="pn">The eternal Son, as the Logos of God, is the one through whom the Father creates. Like the Father he is then other than the world, yet as man he is the supreme revelation of the Father. The Son, through whom God has now spoken is the same one ‘through whom he also created the world. He is the reflection of God’s glory and the exact imprint of God’s very being, and he sustains all things by his powerful word’ (Heb. 1:1–3).</p>
<p class="in">Jesus, the ‘image of the invisible God’ (Col. 1:15), who, as the Logos, is ‘co-Creator’ with the Father, appropriates to himself then all the attributes of the Father – power, goodness, imperishability, invisibility, eternity – that is, all of which is common to much of the Greek understanding of God and so offers a ‘bridge,’ and simultaneously a ‘correction,’ for as Creator he is present to creation and as Revealer he is visibly active within time and history. Jesus, as Creator and Revealer, unites within his very person the understanding of God as wholly other than the world and yet one who acts within the world in his wholly <a id="page_74" class="calibre3"></a>otherness. Jesus is the ultimate bridge to Greek philosophy, but one that radically transforms it.<sup class="calibre6">4</sup></p>
<p class="sec"><b class="calibre8">Philo of Alexandria</b></p>
<p class="pn">Philo (c. 20<small class="calibre10">BC</small>–<small class="calibre10">C</small>. <small class="calibre10">AD</small>40), the Alexandrian Jewish philosopher, had an immense formative influence on the early patristic tradition. He was fundamentally an interpreter of the Hebrew scriptures, primarily the Pentateuch. Moreover, he philosophically exemplifies what many scholars today refer to as Middle Platonism; though he was also influenced by Aristotelianism and Stoicism.<sup class="calibre6">5</sup> It was within this philosophical context that he interpreted the Hebrew scriptures, and so he may also be considered a ‘bridge’ between the biblical and Greek notions of God.<sup class="calibre6">6</sup> As a ‘bridge’ between biblical revelation and Greek philosophy, Philo also became a ‘bridge’ to the Fathers, for they attempted to emulate his example and further his rapprochement in the light of the gospel.</p>
<p class="in">For many contemporary theologians, however, his is a counterfeit and deceptive ‘bridge,’ for he built his bridge, they claim, not from the <a id="page_75" class="calibre3"></a>scriptures to philosophy, but from philosophy to the scriptures. They maintain that he was the first to be seduced by the Platonic understanding of God and so defiled the biblical notion.<sup class="calibre6">7</sup> This adulterated understanding was inherited by the Fathers and the subsequent Christian tradition to our day.</p>
<p class="in">For Philo, there is a hierarchy of being at the summit of which is God who, as the active Creator cause of all, is ‘the intellect of the universe, thoroughly unadulterated and thoroughly unmixed, superior to virtue and superior to science, superior even to abstract good or abstract beauty.’<sup class="calibre6">8</sup> He is self-existent, superior to the Good, more simple than the One, and more primordial than the Monad.<sup class="calibre6">9</sup> Since no name can ultimately be ascribed to ‘the truly Existent,’ Philo saw the divine name ‘Yahweh’ as a concession to human beings, and, relying on the Septuagint, understood it to mean: ‘It is my nature to be, not to be described by name.’<sup class="calibre6">10</sup></p>
<p class="in">Philo, as is well known, is the first to write a treatise on the immutability of God. There he argued that unlike unstable creation, ‘the Existent’ is ‘firm’ in his existence. He is ‘incorruptible,’ ‘imperishable,’ ‘everlasting,’ ‘endowed with all the virtues, and with all perfection, and with all happiness.’<sup class="calibre6">11</sup> Because God dwells ‘in pure light,’ he sees and comprehends all, ‘even the future.’<sup class="calibre6">12</sup> God, as the ‘creator of time’ in so far as he is the creator of the world, exists outside time, and ‘in eternity nothing is past and nothing is future, but everything is present only.’<sup class="calibre6">13</sup> He is ‘uncreated, and the Being who has brought all other things to creation.’<sup class="calibre6">14</sup> The God who truly exists then cannot be compared</p>
<p class="bq1"><a id="page_76" class="calibre3"></a>to any species of created beings; but, dissociating it with any idea of distinctive qualities (for this is what most especially contributes to his [man’s] happiness and to his consummate felicity, to comprehend his [God’s] naked existence without any connection with figure or character), they, I say are content with the bare conception of his existence, and do not attempt to invest him with any form.’<sup class="calibre6">15</sup></p>
<p class="pn">Thus, for Philo, it is the greatest ‘wickedness’ to think that ‘the unchangeable God can be changed.’<sup class="calibre6">16</sup> God does not repent or become angry, or undergo emotional and passionate changes. ‘God is utterly inaccessible to any passion whatever. For it is the peculiar property of human weakness to be disquieted by any such feelings, but God has neither the irrational passions of the soul, nor the parts and limits of the body in the least belonging to him.’<sup class="calibre6">17</sup> God is only said to become angry and to show passion for our instruction and correction.<sup class="calibre6">18</sup></p>
<p class="in">Obviously, Philo wants to uphold the complete wholly otherness of God. But has he gone too far? Has he made God and the world inaccessible to one another? Let us first enumerate his strengths and then his weaknesses.</p>
<p class="in">First, some scholars have criticized Philo for translating God’s name, Yahweh, in the impersonal neuter – to τò ȏv (‘That Which Is’). This appears to undermine the personalism of the biblical notion of God.<sup class="calibre6">19</sup> While there is some validity to this criticism in that it would have been biblically more sound to retain the ό ȏv (‘He Who Is’), I do not believe that Philo necessarily wanted to weaken the personalism of the Hebrew and Septuagint rendering. Rather he wanted to intensify the biblical truth <a id="page_77" class="calibre3"></a>that God is the one who truly is, the ‘living’ God.<sup class="calibre6">20</sup> By naming God as τó ȏv Philo could more precisely accent that God was ‘the Existent,’ that is, that his very nature is ‘to be,’ and so more clearly designate him, in accordance with the Hebrew scriptures, as the Creator who is the author of all else that exists, and equally then that he cannot be placed among nor numbered with all else that exists.<sup class="calibre6">21</sup></p>
<p class="in">Second, by grasping that God could not be placed within a species, Philo rightly saw that God cannot be named among the things created and so, unlike all else, he cannot be fully comprehended. God’s name reveals or ‘names’ him as the ‘unnameable’ or ‘unknowable,’ again in accordance with the scripture. ‘His [God’s] existence, indeed, is a fact which we do comprehend concerning him, but beyond the fact of his existence, we can understand nothing.’<sup class="calibre6">22</sup> God is comprehensible only to himself.<sup class="calibre6">23</sup></p>
<p class="in">Third, when speaking of God’s immutability, Philo used this term to say more what God is not than what he is. It is an expression of his apophatic theology. It needs to be emphasized that all of Philo’s examples of how God is unchangeable and impassible are in contrast to the created order and to human beings, and not positive statements of what God is in himself. The greater portion of his treatise on the unchangeability of God enumerates the ways in which human beings undergo passion and change, only then to differentiate these from the unchangeability of God. For example, human beings are fickle in their relationships, at one moment fervent friends only later to separate. Human beings are unable ‘steadily to adhere to the professions which we originally made; but God is not so easily sated or wearied,’ and thus, in his faithfulness, he could never have actually ‘repented’ of or ‘regretted’ creating humankind (see Gen. 6:50).<sup class="calibre6">24</sup> Moreover, unlike plants, God does not grow nor change with the seasons.<sup class="calibre6">25</sup> Furthermore, God created human beings with the dignity of a soul, and so with intelligence and freedom. Yet they are composed of parts which are in need, but God ‘inasmuch as he is uncreated, and the Being who has brought all other things to creation, stood in need of none of those things which <a id="page_78" class="calibre3"></a>are usually added to creatures.’<sup class="calibre6">26</sup> Human beings not only become physically ill, but they also, in misusing their reason and freedom, have fallen prey to sin – ‘anger,’ ‘intemperance,’ ‘cowardice,’ ‘injustice,’ and ‘impiety.’<sup class="calibre6">27</sup> Not only does God not participate in these corruptible and sinful attributes, but he rather is unchangeable in his goodness, love and mercy.</p>
<p class="bq1">God remembering his own perfect goodness in every particular, even if the whole or the greater part of mankind fall off from him by reason of the abundance and extravagance of their sins, stretching forth his right hand, his hand of salvation, supports man and raises him up, not permitting the whole race to be utterly destroyed and to perish everlastingly [for God] mingles mercy with his justice, which he exercises towards the good actions of even the unworthy; and he not only pities them while judging, but judges them while pitying them, for mercy is older than justice in his sight.<sup class="calibre6">28</sup></p>
<p class="in">Fourth, what we find in Philo, as the above exemplifies, is a denial of negative attributes in order to accentuate what is positive. God is immutable only in the sense that he does not undergo the changes that are inherent within the created order, and he is impassible only in the sense that he is not subject to or controlled by the appetites of a body and the sinful passions of the heart and mind as are human beings.<sup class="calibre6">29</sup> By disavowing of God all the negative changes within the world and all unreasonable and sinful passions of humankind, thus making him immutable and impassible, Philo has not made God aloof, static, unloving, and impersonal, which is the common cry of many contemporary theologians. Rather, such a denial actually allows him to intensify God’s mercy, love, and providence as unchangeable in its utter perfection – this is why God does not ‘regret’ having made humankind.</p>
<p class="in">What we see here is the birth of a distinction, unarticulated by Philo and probably unconscious, between the impassibility of God and what might be called the passion of God. Philo states that unlike the human race, which is subject to sorrow, grief and fear over present and expected evil, ‘God is free from grief, and exempt from fear, and enjoys immunity from every kind of suffering, and is the only nature which possesses <a id="page_79" class="calibre3"></a>complete happiness and blessedness.’ And yet, Philo immediately continues: ‘God is merciful, and compassionate, and kind, driving envy to a distance from him.’<sup class="calibre6">30</sup> God is impassible in that he does not undergo change of emotional states as do humans, but he is nonetheless utterly passionate in his love, mercy and goodness because, as the eternal and self-existing God, he is all perfect and unchanging in these attributes.<sup class="calibre6">31</sup> Implicitly for Philo, the attributes which establish that God is immutable and impassible – being imperishable, incorruptible, eternal, self-existent, and all perfect – are the same attributes which allow him to be the living, merciful, loving and providential Creator. As Philo states:</p>
<p class="bq1">But God has given nothing to himself, for he has no need of anything; but he has given the world to the world, and its parts he has bestowed on themselves and on one another, and also on the universe, and without having judged anything to be worthy of grace, (for he gives all his good things without grudging to the universe and to its parts), he merely has regard to his own everlasting goodness, thinking the doing of good to be a line of conduct suitable to his own happy and blessed nature; so that if any one were to ask me, what was the cause of the creation of the world, having learnt from Moses, I should answer, that the goodness of the living God, being the most important of his graces, is in itself the cause.<sup class="calibre6">32</sup></p>
<p class="in">These are not the words of a Platonist nor of an Aristotelian. They are the words of a faithful Jew who knew his scriptures. While God is wholly other than all else that exists, he is the good Creator who is present to and active within his good creation without ceasing to be the wholly other in so doing. Thus, as we saw in the Old and New Testaments, it is the notion of God as Creator, for Philo, which founds both the otherness of God from the created order and his intimate presence to and activity within the created order. What is becoming ever more evident is that the <a id="page_80" class="calibre3"></a>act of creation is developing into a hermeneutical principle for defining the nature of God and his relationship to the created order. Nonetheless, Philo is not without tensions and weaknesses.</p>
<p class="in">Despite the above defense of Philo, there is tension within his thought concerning God’s transcendence and immanence, and it is due to the influence of Platonism. While Philo emphasized the presence and activity of God, founded upon the fact that God is Creator, yet he states in numerous places that God creates and acts within the created order through the Logos and Sophia. Commenting on the three strangers who visited Abraham (see Gen. 18), Philo states:</p>
<p class="bq1">The one in the middle is the Father of the universe, who in the sacred scriptures is called by his proper name, I am that I am; and the beings on each side are those most ancient powers which are always close to the living God, one of which is called his creative power, and the other his royal power. And the creative power is God, for it is by this that he made and arranged the universe; and the royal power is the Lord, for it is fitting that the Creator should lord it over and govern the creature.<sup class="calibre6">33</sup></p>
<p class="in">Scholars debate whether Philo understands the Logos of God to be an actual personal being or the personification of God’s power immanent within the world. The above text illustrates this problem. While the Logos is depicted as a distinct ‘person,’ yet Philo refers to ‘him’ as God’s creative power. If the Logos is God’s immanent power and activity, this would be more in accordance with the Hebrew view found in Genesis 1, the prophets, and the Wisdom literature. Contemporary Platonic thought, especially later Neoplatonism, would see the Logos as a distinct being. The Logos here would be understood to be an intermediary interposed between the transcendent God and the created order. For example, Philo states that ‘the word of God is over all the world, and is the most ancient, and the most universal of all the things that are created.’<sup class="calibre6">34</sup> He is ‘the Son of God, the being most perfect in all virtue.’<sup class="calibre6">35</sup> The Logos is also called ‘the divine reason, which is the helmsman and governor of the universe.’<sup class="calibre6">36</sup> Here the Logos appears to be a created personal being and not the divine power of God through which he creates and governs the world.</p>
<p class="in">Because of Philo’s hierarchical order, an order where God is beyond ‘the One’ and beyond ‘the Monad,’ his understanding of the Logos can, <a id="page_81" class="calibre3"></a>at times, appear to act as a ‘spatial’ semi-divine intermediary or principle between God and the created order. God would then be not only other than the created order, but also apart from the created order.<sup class="calibre6">37</sup> This is the real ambiguity of Philo’s thought and it will be a weakness that is inherited by many of the early Fathers.<sup class="calibre6">38</sup></p>
<p class="in">This ambiguity and tension may be clarified if one bears in mind Philo’s use of allegorical interpretation. Thus, when Philo designates the Logos as a being in his own right, as for example, when he portrays the Logos as one of the angels who appeared to Abraham, or as the governor, the helmsman, the most ancient one, and the Son of God, he is allegorizing, and so personifying the Logos as God’s immanent power and activity. This is similar to the way in which the Wisdom literature personifies ‘Wisdom.’ If this interpretation is correct, then Philo does not necessarily place God apart from the created order, but rather he is present to and active within the created order through the Logos. The Logos becomes the immanent expression of the transcendent Creator.</p>
<p class="in">In conclusion, what has been said here hopefully clarifies and demonstrates that Philo’s thought is an authentic ‘bridge’ between the biblical and Greek notions of God. He is not a Jew who became a Greek, as his critics charge, though he may be a Jew who spoke with a Greek accent.<sup class="calibre6">39</sup> While there may be some ambiguities and weaknesses, yet Philo founded his understanding of God upon the biblical, and not Greek, truth that God is the Creator. That God is the Creator determined, for Philo, that he <a id="page_82" class="calibre3"></a>is truly the living God who is the author of all that is. As such, God is wholly other than all else, and it is this very wholly otherness which empowers him to create and so manifest his immutable and impassible love, mercy and providence in all their passionate perfection.</p>
<p class="ntcon">1  R. Grant, <i class="calibre5">The Early Christian Doctrine of God</i> (Charlottesville: University Press of Virginia, 1966) p. 5. Grant refers to some of the Greek and Roman authors to which the New Testament may allude. See pp. 3–14. While I will be drawing somewhat different, but not contrary, conclusions than Grant, I am indebted to him for specifying the following New Testament texts.</p>
<p class="ntnlf">2  For studies on Plato’s, Aristotle’s, and Plotinus’ understanding of God see the standard histories of Greek Philosophy, such as F. Copleston, <i class="calibre5">The History of Philosophy</i>, Vol. 1 (New York: Doubleday, 1962); and M.J. Walsh, <i class="calibre5">A History of Philosophy</i> (London: Geoffrey Chapman, 1985), pp. 23–74. See also C. Stead, <i class="calibre5">Philosophy in Christian Antiquity</i> (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1994), pp. 14–39, 54–75; and G. Watson, <i class="calibre5">Greek Philosophy and the Christian Notion of God</i> (Dublin: The Columba Press, 1994), pp. 18–87.</p>
<p class="ntnlf">3  R. Grant even sees James’ appeal that within God ‘there is no variation or shadow due to change’ (Jas 1:17) as ‘influenced by Hellenistic rhetoric’ (<i class="calibre5">The Early Christian Doctrine of God</i>, p. 10). If Grant is correct, the Letter of James would not just be proposing the ethical immutability of God, but rather his ontological unchangeableness.</p>
<p class="ntnlf">4  What is evident here is that the New Testament notion of revelation, surprisingly, also offers a ‘bridge’ to Greek philosophy. Greek philosophy was ultimately concerned about knowledge of God and humankind’s relationship to God. However, because God is transcendent he cannot be present to or act within the world. Whatever knowledge of God humans are able to obtain is from their own philosophical efforts. The Christian notion of revelation supports the transcendence of God since what is revealed is from God himself, who is other than all else. Yet, while what is revealed is from the transcendent God and so not of human origin and so not a human philosophy (see 1 Thes. 1:4-5; 1 Cor. 1:17—2:16; 2 Cor. 5:16–19), it is nonetheless truly revelation for God reveals it to humankind through the words and actions of his Son, Jesus Christ, within time and history. The New Testament notion of revelation, in contrast to its understanding of creation, does not offer words and concepts that might be philosophical ‘bridges,’ but rather it offers a person, Jesus – the supreme revelation of God – as a bridge to Greek philosophy and its concerns. As R. Grant states:</p>
<p class="bq1f">We conclude that for the theologians of the earliest church all cosmological statements are ultimately Christological, the knowledge of God that man can infer from the cosmos by itself is inadequate and, apart from God’s self-revelation in Christ, bound to lead to idolatry. The Early Christian Doctrine of God, p. 13.</p>
<p class="ntnl">The Apologists, such as Justin Martyr, would develop this idea. While the Greeks may have had some knowledge of God through the <i class="calibre5">logos spermatikos</i> (the seed of the word), Christians have the full knowledge of God for the Logos himself has become man and revealed it to them.</p>
<p class="ntnlf">5  For studies of Philo and Middle Platonism see: H. Chadwick, ‘Philo’ in <i class="calibre5">The Cambridge History of Greek and Early Medieval Philosophy</i>, ed. A.H. Armstrong (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1970), pp. 135–57; J. Dillon, <i class="calibre5">The Middle Platonists: A Study of Platonism</i> 80 <i class="calibre5">B.C.–A.D</i>. 220 (London: Duckworth, 1977); E.R. Goodenough, <i class="calibre5">An Introduction to Philo Judaeus</i> (Oxford: Basil Blackwell, 1962); Hallman, <i class="calibre5">The Descent of God</i>, pp. 23–31; S. Sandmel, <i class="calibre5">Philo of Alexandria</i> (New York: Oxford University Press, 1979); J. Sanders, ‘Historical Considerations’ in <i class="calibre5">The Openness of God</i>, pp. 69–72; Stead, <i class="calibre5">Philosophy in Christian Antiquity</i>, pp. 54–62; Watson, <i class="calibre5">Greek Philosophy and the Christian Notion of God</i>, pp. 52–67; H.A. Wolfson, <i class="calibre5">Philo</i>, 2 Vols (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1947).</p>
<p class="ntnlf">6  Following the philosophical tradition of interpreting Homer allegorically, Philo introduced the allegorical interpretation of the Pentateuch. In this he hoped to harmoniously synthesize biblical revelation with Greek philosophy, believing that the truth discovered in each finds its source in one and the same God.</p>
<p class="ntnlf">7  For a few of many examples, see R.E. Edwards, ‘The Pagan Dogma of the Absolute Unchangeableness of God,’ <i class="calibre5">Religious Studies</i> 14 (1978):305–13; Hallman, <i class="calibre5">The Descent of God</i>, pp. 23–29; Pollard, ‘The Impassibility of God, ‘pp. 355–57; Sanders, <i class="calibre5">The Openness of God</i>, pp. 69–72.</p>
<p class="ntnlf">8  Philo, <i class="calibre5">De Opificio Mundi</i>, 8. Translation from <i class="calibre5">The Works of Philo</i>, C.D. Yonge (Peabody: Hendrickson Publishers, 1993). J. Hallman in his historical study of the impassibility of God – <i class="calibre5">The Descent of God</i> – provides almost all of the relevant passages from Philo and the Fathers. While I am greatly indebted to his research, I have also found a few other relevant passages. For another survey of the scriptural, Jewish/Hellenic, and patristic thought on God’s impassibility one should consult Mozley’s classic study: <i class="calibre5">The Impassibility of God: A Survey of Christian Thought</i>.</p>
<p class="ntnlf">9  See Philo, <i class="calibre5">De Vita Contemplativa</i>, 2. In saying that God was ‘beyond the Monad,’ Philo did not want to make God abstract and impersonal or even beyond being, but rather he wanted to ensure that God was not ‘numbered’ as the first in a series and so part of that series. As the Creator, God cannot be numbered with or placed within that which is created.</p>
<p class="ntull">10  <i class="calibre5">De Mutatione Nominum</i>, 11, see 12–14. Yonge translates τò ȏv ‘the living God.’ I prefer the more literal and accurate translation – ‘the Existent.’</p>
<p class="ntull">11  <i class="calibre5">Quod Deus Immutabilis Sit</i>, 4, 18, 26, 32, and 142.</p>
<p class="ntull">12  <i class="calibre5">Quod Deus Immutabilis Sit</i>, 29.</p>
<p class="ntull">13  <i class="calibre5">Quod Deus Immutabilis Sit</i>, 30 and 32.</p>
<p class="ntull">14  <i class="calibre5">Quod Deus Immutabilis Sit</i>, 56. God brought the universe ‘out of non-existence (έκ μή ὄντων)’ (<i class="calibre5">Legum Allegoriae</i>, III, 10). See also <i class="calibre5">De Fuga et Inventione</i>, 46 and <i class="calibre5">De Vita Mosis</i>, II, 267.</p>
<p class="ntnl">There has been much discussion among scholars as to whether or not Philo actually taught <i class="calibre5">creatio ex nihilo</i>. For a brief account of this discussion see E.F. Osborn, <i class="calibre5">The Philosophy of Clement of Alexandria</i> (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1975), pp. 34–35; and G. May, <i class="calibre5">Creatio Ex Nihilo: The Doctrine of ‘Creation out of Nothing’ in Early Christian Thought</i> (Edinburgh: T &amp; T Clark, 1994), pp. ix, 9–26.</p>
<p class="ntnl">May argues that Philo did not teach <i class="calibre5">creatio ex nihilo</i>.</p>
<p class="bq1f">He is so strongly dependent on the Platonist ontology that he cannot think of the creation of the world without the presupposition of a pre-existent material. He has not grasped the biblical conception of creation in its uniqueness, and therefore he cannot undertake the task of mediating it philosophically and fundamentally setting aside the Platonist doctrine of ‘first principles.’ p. 24.</p>
<p class="ntnl">May puts forth a very strong case. Nonetheless, while Philo may not have used that exact wording – <i class="calibre5">creatio ex nihilo</i> (in Greek, obviously), and while he is clearly ambiguous at times, I believe it is precisely this idea that he is striving to express. He argues, contrary to the philosophies of his day, that the world (and so, it would seem, matter) is not eternal. In contrast Philo maintains that the world was brought into existence by God. See for example, <i class="calibre5">De Opificio Mundi</i>, 7 and 8, 170 and 171; <i class="calibre5">De Confusione Linguarum</i>, 114; <i class="calibre5">De Somniis</i>, II, 283. In his treatise <i class="calibre5">De Aeternitate Mundi</i> Philo first sets forth the arguments for the creation of the world (13–19) and then gives all the arguments for its eternity (20–149). He concludes by stating that in a further work he will refute these last arguments (150). Unfortunately, he either never wrote this treatise or it is now lost.</p>
<p class="ntull">15  <i class="calibre5">Quod Deus Immutabilis Sit</i>, 55.</p>
<p class="ntull">16  <i class="calibre5">Quod Deus Immutabilis Sit</i>, 22. See 26. For further references to God’s unchangeableness see, <i class="calibre5">De Cherubim</i>, 19; <i class="calibre5">Quaestiones et Solutiones in Genesin</i>, I, 93; <i class="calibre5">De Somniis</i>, II, 220.</p>
<p class="ntull">17  <i class="calibre5">Quod Deus Immutabilis Sit</i>, 52. For Philo, we must take from our minds all that is created, mortal, changeable, and unconsecrated when ‘regarding the uncreated God, immortal, unchangeable, and holy, the only God, blessed for ever.’ <i class="calibre5">De Sacrificiis Abelis et Cain</i>, 102.</p>
<p class="ntull">18  See <i class="calibre5">Quod Deus Immutabilis Sit</i>, 53.</p>
<p class="ntull">19  For example see, Sanders, <i class="calibre5">The Openness of God</i>, p. 69 and fn. 31.</p>
<p class="ntull">20  Those who criticize Philo and the Septuagint for rendering the name ‘Yahweh’ as ‘I Am Who Am’ or ‘He who/that Is’ fail to grasp that to be the fulness of being does not render God immutably ‘lifeless,’ but immutably ‘life-full.’ This is what Philo believes is revealed and the Septuagint has rightly understood. We will discuss this more fully when we treat Aquinas’ notion of God.</p>
<p class="ntull">21  Philo’s use of τò ȏv may be similar to my refering to God as ‘the Wholly Other.’ In calling God ‘the Wholly Other,’ I do not wish to undermine his personal nature, but to stress that he is completely distinct from, and so other than, all else that exists. He cannot be placed within the created order and so exists in a singular manner, that is, in an ontological order of his own.</p>
<p class="ntull">22  <i class="calibre5">Quod Deus Immutabilis Sit</i>, 62. Also see <i class="calibre5">De Mutatione Nominum</i>, 7. While saying that we can know nothing of God beyond the fact of his existence, Philo does not mean that we literally know nothing other than that he exists. Rather he is emphasizing that we cannot comprehend what it means for God to exist. Through creation and especially through revelation we can obtain some knowledge of God. See Chadwick, <i class="calibre5">The Cambridge History of Later Greek and Early Medieval Philosophy</i>, pp. 148–50.</p>
<p class="ntull">23  See <i class="calibre5">Legum Allegoriae</i>, III, 206, and <i class="calibre5">De Posteritate Caini</i>, 16 and 168.</p>
<p class="ntull">24  <i class="calibre5">Quod Deus Immutabilis Sit</i>, 28. Also see <i class="calibre5">Quaestiones et Solutiones in Genesin</i>, I, 93.</p>
<p class="ntull">25  See <i class="calibre5">Quod Deus Immutabilis Sit</i>, 37–40.</p>
<p class="ntull">26  <i class="calibre5">Quod Deus Immutabilis Sit</i>, 56, see 57. In <i class="calibre5">De Mutatione Nominum</i> Philo states that God, ‘in as much as he is living, … is full of himself, and is sufficient for himself, and he existed before the creation of the world, and equally after the creation of the universe; for he is immovable and unchangeable, having no need of any other thing or being whatever, so that all things belong to him, but, properly speaking, he does not belong to anything.’ 27–8.</p>
<p class="ntull">27  See <i class="calibre5">Quod Deus Immutabilis Sit</i>, 63–66, 70–71, and 112.</p>
<p class="ntull">28  <i class="calibre5">Quod Deus Immutabilis Sit</i>, 73 and 76.</p>
<p class="ntull">29  Almost as a refrain Philo states that ‘God is not as man,’ see <i class="calibre5">Quod Deus Immutabilis Sit</i>, 53, 62. It is sometimes argued that Philo, having been influenced by Stoicism, has a very negative view of human emotion and passion. There may be some truth to this, but it must be remembered that in this treatise he is discussing the negative aspects of human change and passion in order to show that God does not possess these. It is interesting that, while Philo denies the negative aspects of human emotion and passion, he nonetheless attributes to God those ‘human’ passions and emotions (virtues) which are good, such as mercy, justice and love.</p>
<p class="ntull">30  <i class="calibre5">De Abrahamo</i>, 202 and 203.</p>
<p class="ntull">31  J. Hallman notes that ‘In spite of his adherence to the Hellenistic understanding that God is impassible and without emotion, not once in his entire corpus did Philo connect the technical term <i class="calibre5">apathes</i> or <i class="calibre5">apatheia</i> to God.’ <i class="calibre5">The Descent of God</i>, pp. 23–24. The reason Philo never used these technical Greek terms may lie precisely in that, while he wanted to deny of God the negative changes and passions exemplified in the created order and human life, he did not want to deny the perfect passion of God. God may be impassible, but he is not completely devoid of passion, that is, he is not <i class="calibre5">apatheia</i>.</p>
<p class="ntnl">Most critics of Philo’s treatise on God’s unchangeability so completely miss this aspect of his thought that one wonders at times whether they have read anything other than the title and each others’ criticisms. Hallman is aware that Philo allows for God to be loving, kind, and merciful. However, he wishes to interpret this as either Philo being inconsistent or that he allows for some passibility in God. What Hallman misses is that God’s passionate love and mercy, for Philo, are not inconsistent with his being impassible. Actually, for Philo, God is supremely passionate in his love, because he is impassible with regards to all that would negate this love – such as emotional and passionate changes. See Hallman, <i class="calibre5">The Descent of God</i>, pp. 23–29, and also Sanders, <i class="calibre5">The Openness of God</i>, pp. 70–1.</p>
<p class="ntull">32  <i class="calibre5">Quod Deus Immutabilis Sit</i>, 108. See also <i class="calibre5">DeMutatione Nominum</i>, 46; <i class="calibre5">Legum Allegoriae</i>, III, 68; and <i class="calibre5">De Opificio Mundi</i>, 23. What Philo fails to address is the deeper philosophical issue of what founds God’s impassible passion, that is, his immutably perfect love and mercy. As we will see none of the Fathers addresses this issue either.</p>
<p class="ntull">33  <i class="calibre5">De Abrahamo</i>, 121; see also 122. Christians have been fascinated by Philo’s ‘trinitarian’ interpretation of this passage. In <i class="calibre5">De Cherubim</i>, Philo also states that God ‘is the cause of it [the world], by whom it was made. That the materials are the four elements, of which it is composed; that the instrument is the word [logos] of God, by means of which it was made; and the object of the building you will find to be the display of the goodness of the Creator.’ 127.</p>
<p class="ntnl">See also <i class="calibre5">Quod Deus Immutabilis Sit</i>, 57, and <i class="calibre5">De Opificio Mundi</i>, 72–75 where Philo discusses the phrase of Genesis 1:26: ‘Let <i class="calibre5">us</i> make …,’ and <i class="calibre5">De Somniis</i>, I, 137–59 for his interpretation of Jacob’s ladder.</p>
<p class="ntull">34  <i class="calibre5">Legum Allegoriae</i>, III, 175.</p>
<p class="ntull">35  <i class="calibre5">De Vita Mosis</i>, II, 134.</p>
<p class="ntull">36  <i class="calibre5">De Cherubim</i>, 36.</p>
<p class="ntull">37  On this point, H. Chadwick writes:</p>
<p class="bq1f">Philo also has a developed notion of the great chain of being: the cosmos is a continuum of grades of being, filled out to the maximum possible plenitude, the diversity of which is held together by the immanent power of the Logos…. The Logos is God immanent, the vital power holding together the hierarchy of being, who as God’s viceroy mediates revelation to the created order so that he stands midway on the frontier between creator and creature. Like the manna he is God’s heavenly food to man, and the high priest who intercedes with God for frail mortals. The supreme God is too remote to have direct contact with this world, and it was the Logos who appeared, e.g., at the burning bush. The Logos dwelt especially in Moses, who was thereby virtually deified. By those less than enlightened the Logos is taken to be God, though in reality he is God’s image…. On the other hand, the actual function of Logos in Philo’s thought points to the conclusion that the impetus is coming not so much from the Jewish side as from that of late Platonist philosophy, where the remote transcendent God requires a second, metaphysically inferior aspect of himself to face towards the lower world. <i class="calibre5">The Cambridge History of Later Greek and Early Medieval Philosophy</i>, pp. 142–43, 144, 145.</p>
<p class="ntnl">Chadwick may overstate the Platonism within Philo for he, like Philo himself, sometimes refers to Philo’s notion of the Logos as ‘the immanent power of God’ active within the universe, and at other times as a distinct subject in his own right. The former would be in keeping with the Hebrew understanding of the Word of God, the latter would be the more Platonic understanding.</p>
<p class="ntull">38  Only at the Council of Nicea, where the Logos, as a distinct eternal divine subject in his own right, is proclaimed <i class="calibre5">homoousion</i> with the Father, will this Platonic influence be broken. For now the one who is God as the Father is God, and so transcendent as he is transcendent, is the same one who became man and dwelt in our midst. Nicea firmly established the biblical notion of God’s transcendence as the Wholly Other in our midst.</p>
<p class="ntull">39  M. Edwards states that we must take Philo ‘at his own word as a pious intellectual, who expressed in Greek the spirit of a Jew.’ ‘Justin’s Logos and the Word of God,’ <i class="calibre5">Journal of Early Christian Studies</i> 3/3 (1995):264.</p>
</body>
</html>
