<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en-US">
  <head>
    <title>Does God Suffer?</title>
    <link href="../styles/page-template.xpgt" rel="stylesheet" type="application/vnd.adobe-page-template+xml"/>
    <meta content="urn:uuid:e0000000-0000-0000-0000-000004626051" name="Adept.expected.resource"/>
    <meta http-equiv="Content-Type" content="text/html; charset=utf-8"/>
  <link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="../../stylesheet.css"/>
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="../../page_styles.css"/>
</head>
  <body class="calibre">
<p class="cta"><a id="page_83" class="calibre2"></a><a href="06_Contents.xhtml#ch5" id="ch5" class="calibre2">5</a></p>
<p class="cs"><a href="06_Contents.xhtml#ch5" class="calibre2">The Patristic Doctrine of God</a></p>
<p class="pn">Because the early Fathers lived and worked within the environment of the New Testament and Jewish/Hellenic ‘bridges,’ they did not think it inappropriate to use language and concepts that were prevalent among their contemporary philosophical colleagues, even though they wished to be faithful to the Jewish and Christian revelation. They too, following the example of Philo and the apostles, especially Paul, saw themselves as apologetic and evangelistic ‘bridges’ to the pagan and philosophical world in which they lived. They instinctively did what they believed the New Testament did, and they did so by design. <sup class="calibre6">1</sup> The question is: Did they do so without any, or little, gospel discernment and theological discrimination?</p>
<p class="in">Many contemporary theologians, as we have seen, argue that the Fathers too easily succumbed to the dominant Greek philosophical notion of God.<sup class="calibre6">2</sup> In so doing they transformed the living, loving and active <a id="page_84" class="calibre3"></a>God of the Bible into the immutable, impassible and inert God of Hellenic philosophy. They maintain that only a changeable and passible God can philosophically account for the biblical data.</p>
<p class="in">However, I believe that this is a large component of the problem. Contemporary theologians have not come to the Bible and the Fathers philosophically neutral, but rather already convinced that an impassible and immutable God will not do. Thus, their interpretation of the Old Testament and the Fathers is driven, at least in part, by an already preconceived understanding of the philosophical issues involved and the philosophical answers that must be given.<sup class="calibre6">3</sup></p>
<p class="in">In this chapter I wish to demonstrate that, on the whole (but not without mistakes), the Fathers, in their account of the impassibility of God, were more influenced by and more faithful to biblical revelation than those contemporary theologians who champion God’s passibility. I want to maintain that the philosophical notion of God and of his relationship to the world, which grew up within and gave expression to the patristic tradition, finds its source, its inspiration, and its impetus from within the Bible itself. Thus, it is not the Fathers’ teaching on God’s impassibility which was and is imposed upon the Bible, but rather the contemporary theological currents concerning God’s passibility.</p>
<p class="in">However, merely to present here the patristic tradition, and later the Scholastic teaching, concerning God’s impassibility will far from suffice. It would be unjust and irresponsible to write off, in the name of the tradition, the issues raised and the answers proffered within contemporary theology. The contemporary issues that have been raised rightfully demand of the tradition further clarification, greater refinement, and more creative development. Hopefully then, this chapter will freshly and creatively, yet critically, examine the teaching of the Fathers in the light of the scriptures and the contemporary philosophical and theological questions, and provide answers that are more theologically convincing and more religiously compelling than those of the past.<sup class="calibre6">4</sup> I wish to do this in such a manner so as to establish not only that the Fathers affirmed God’s wholly otherness, but equally to substantiate that they both maintained and even enhanced the early church’s understanding of his personal, loving, compassionate presence to and activity within the world.</p>
<p class="in">In the light of the previous chapter we will now examine the patristic understanding of God and of his relationship to the created order. We will focus exclusively on the teaching of some of the significant second- and third-century Greek and Latin Fathers since it is within their early apologetic defence of Christianity that the church’s more philosophical <a id="page_85" class="calibre3"></a>understanding of God, both in contrast to and in comparison with the pagan and Greek tradition, was initially formulated.<sup class="calibre6">5</sup></p>
<p class="in">Our starting point must be Pelikan’s correct assessment that ‘the early Christian picture of God was controlled by the self-evident axiom, accepted by all, of the absoluteness and impassibility of the divine nature.’<sup class="calibre6">6</sup> The question is: Why is this so? What confirmed the early church in this axiom? Was it due to philosophy or to scripture?</p>
<p class="sec"><b class="calibre8">Justin Martyr</b></p>
<p class="pn">We will first consider Justin Martyr (c. <small class="calibre10">AD</small>100–165) since, of all the early Apologists, he provides the most philosophic and systematic defense of Christianity. Justin’s apologetic for Christianity was written within the Middle Platonic and the Hellenistic Judaic (Philonic) tradition of his academic environment.<sup class="calibre6">7</sup> He zealously upholds the transcendence of God, and so he is other than the finite order. God in his goodness to man is the provider of all things. Therefore it is an insult to God’s ‘ineffable glory’ to worship idols.<sup class="calibre6">8</sup> God is above all names and the names that are given to him, such as Father, Creator and Lord, are due to his ‘good deeds and functions.’<sup class="calibre6">9</sup> He is ‘unbegotten and incorruptible, and therefore he is God, but all other things after him are created and corruptible.’<sup class="calibre6">10</sup> God is ‘unchangeable and eternal,’<sup class="calibre6">11</sup> and therefore, ‘God, the Creator of all things, is superior to the things that are to be changed.’<sup class="calibre6">12</sup> Therefore, Christians dedicate themselves ‘to the unbegotten and impassible God.’<sup class="calibre6">13</sup> When asked what he calls God, Justin responded: ‘That which always <a id="page_86" class="calibre3"></a>maintains the same nature, and in the same manner, and is the cause of all other things – that, indeed, is God.’<sup class="calibre6">14</sup></p>
<p class="in">It is evident that Justin, like Philo, in ascribing to God the attributes of unchangeability, impassibility, unutterability, and unbegottenness, was stating what God is not, rather than what he is. He was protecting the transcendent otherness of God by denying of him those aspects – changeability, passibility – which would place him within the created order. He did not wish to deny, in so doing, God’s providential goodness and love.<sup class="calibre6">15</sup> The main concern here is the implications that Justin, nonetheless, drew from what he taught about God. It must be admitted that he did what contemporary critics argue must be the case if one conceives God as immutably and impassibly perfect.</p>
<p class="in">In order to uphold the otherness of God, Justin felt compelled to deny that God has any direct contact with the created order. L.W. Barnard states that, for Justin, God is ‘the eternal, immovable, unchanging Cause and Ruler of the Universe, nameless and unutterable, unbegotten, residing far above the heavens, and is incapable of coming into immediate contact with any of his creatures, yet is observant of them although removed from them and unapproachable by them.’<sup class="calibre6">16</sup> While God cannot have any spatial character, yet Justin states that ‘he remains in his own place, wherever that is.’<sup class="calibre6">17</sup> Wherever God may exist, either above the heavens or in the heavens, he is far removed from the created order.<sup class="calibre6">18</sup> Thus God cannot be the subject of the Old Testament theophanies. Rather, only the Logos, who comes forth from him at creation, has immediate contact with creation and the affairs of human beings.<sup class="calibre6">19</sup> ‘He who has but the smallest intelligence will not venture to assert that the Maker and Father of all things, having left all supercelestial matters, was visible on a little portion of the earth.’<sup class="calibre6">20</sup></p>
<p class="in">Justin has given to God the Hellenistic notion of transcendence where God must not only be other than the created order, but also removed from it. In so doing, even though God loves and cares for human beings, his activity within the created order is always one step removed. The immediate love and immanent activity is always that of the Logos, who while divine, is necessarily subordinate to the one who is truly and fully God.<sup class="calibre6">21</sup></p>
<p class="in">There is necessarily then a tension within Justin’s thought. While he upholds the perfect goodness and love of God, yet, in wanting to uphold <a id="page_87" class="calibre3"></a>the godness of God, God himself is never actually permitted to express directly his godly love on behalf of the world.<sup class="calibre6">22</sup></p>
<p class="in">The reason why Justin isolated God from the world, and so making him incapable of directly acting within it, may lie in his ambiguous notion of creation. He seems to have held that Plato, Moses, and Christians equally believed that God, through the Logos, ‘altered matter which was shapeless … (and so) the whole world was made out of the substance spoken of before by Moses.’<sup class="calibre6">23</sup> It is unclear whether Justin held, along with Plato, that this pre-existent matter was eternal. He does not address this issue.<sup class="calibre6">24</sup> Nonetheless, if Justin had had a clear concept of <a id="page_88" class="calibre3"></a><i class="calibre5">creatio ex nihilo</i>, he would never have conceived God as being distant, and so disassociated, from creation. Here we again see the importance of the concept of creation. It not only guarantees the otherness of God, but it also safeguards his immediate presence to what is created. Thus, while those who argue that an immutable and impassible God cannot be present to and active within the created order can find some justification for such an accusation in the theology of Justin, the fault lies not in his notion of God, but in his dubious and faulty notion of the act of creation.</p>
<p class="sec"><b class="calibre8">Aristides, Athenagoras, Theophilus</b></p>
<p class="pn">Three lesser Apologists, while not as comprehensive as Justin in their philosophical approach to Christianity, nonetheless exemplify the early patristic understanding of God and of his relationship to the world and humankind.</p>
<p class="in">Aristides (early second century) contrasts the true understanding of God with that of the pagan gods and the created order. The pagans worship ‘creation more than their Creator.’<sup class="calibre6">25</sup> ‘God is not born, not made, an ever-abiding nature without beginning and without end, immortal, perfect and incomprehensible.’<sup class="calibre6">26</sup> He is above all passions and infirmities.<sup class="calibre6">27</sup> The elements out of which the world is made are not gods for they are ‘perishable and mutable, and produced out of that which did not exist at the command of the true God, who is indestructible and immutable and invisible; yet he sees all things and as he wills modifies and changes things.’<sup class="calibre6">28</sup> God is not like man who is ‘subject to anger and jealousy and desire and change of purpose and has many infirmities.’<sup class="calibre6">29</sup> Human beings should not worship pagan gods who are not God at all, but ‘one ought to reverence the invisible and all-seeing and all-creating God.’<sup class="calibre6">30</sup></p>
<p class="in">Athenagoras (second century) argued in a similar fashion. Unlike the false gods and created things which are composed of parts, God is ‘uncreated, and impassible, and indivisible.’<sup class="calibre6">31</sup> Christians are not atheists for they acknowledge that God is ‘uncreated, eternal, invisible, impassible, incomprehensible, illimitable, who is apprehended by the understanding only.’<sup class="calibre6">32</sup> The false gods are subject to time and so change with the elements and the seasons, but the true God is ‘immortal, and immovable, and unalterable.’<sup class="calibre6">33</sup> The gods are subject to emotional fits, to immorality and to sin, but the true God is ‘in want of nought, and is superior to carnal desire.’<sup class="calibre6">34</sup></p>
<p class="in"><a id="page_89" class="calibre3"></a>Of all of the Apologists, Theophilus (late second century) presents one of the most comprehensive statements about God and his attributes.</p>
<p class="bq1l">The appearance of God is ineffable and indescribable, and cannot be seen by eyes of flesh. For in glory he is incomprehensible, in greatness unfathomable, in height inconceivable, in power incomparable, in wisdom unrivalled, in goodness inimitable, in kindness unutterable…. [Theophilus then proceeds to say what it means for God to be named Light, Word, Mind, Spirit, Wisdom, Strength, Power, etc. and continues:] You will say, then, to me, ‘Is God angry?’ Yes; he is angry with those who act wickedly, but he is good, and kind, and merciful to those who love and fear him; for he is a chastener of the godly and the father of the righteous; but he is a judge and punisher of the impious.</p>
<p class="bqf">And he is without beginning, because he is unbegotten; and he is unchangeable, because he is immortal. And he is called God on account of his having placed all things on security afforded by himself; and on account of [θέειν], for θέειν means running, and moving, and being active, and nourishing, and foreseeing, and governing, and making things alive. But he is Lord, because he rules over the universe; Father, because he is before all things; Fashioner and Maker, because he is creator and maker of the universe; the Highest because of his being above all; and Almighty because he himself rules and embraces all.<sup class="calibre6">35</sup></p>
<p class="paft">Unlike matter, which is not uncreated and therefore mutable and alterable, God, who is uncreated, ‘is immutable and unalterable.’<sup class="calibre6">36</sup></p>
<p class="in">Three comments can be made concerning the thought of the above three Apologists. First, it should be noted that God’s immutability and impassibility are primarily founded upon what he is not and not upon what he is. The line of demarcation is that between Creator and creature.<sup class="calibre6">37</sup> As Creator God cannot possess those attributes which are constitutive of being a creature nor those vices to which humankind have fallen prey. To say that God is immutable and impassible is to deny of him those attributes that would make him like the fickle and sensuous pagan gods or like sinful and corruptible humankind. Therefore, God is not perishable, changeable, alterable, and subject to infirmities or to sinful and carnal passions. More positively, the attributes of immutability and impassibility, in denying of God all that is changeable and corruptible, assure that he possesses those attributes that constitute his divinity – uncreated, immortal, eternal, perfect, indestructible. The attributes of immutability and impassibility then free God from all that is <a id="page_90" class="calibre3"></a>not divine and simultaneously guarantee all that is divine, his eternal and unchanging perfection.</p>
<p class="in">Second, and following from this, to say that God is immutable and impassible, is not to say that he is lifeless and inert. Rather, as Theophilus strongly argues, the immutable and impassible perfection of God attests that he is truly the living, active and dynamic God who is the sole source of all that lives and is active. He governs and cares for his creation in all his goodness and love.</p>
<p class="in">Third, Theophilus even states that God is angry. What needs to be noted is that this anger is not predicated upon some negative emotional state, but rather upon his unchangeable goodness and love. Anger is more an expression of God’s perfect goodness, than an expression of some emotional change of state within God himself. While the philosophical implications of this are not worked out by Theophilus, the inference is that it is because of God’s unchangeable and perfect goodness that one can predicate anger of God. Sin and evil confront the perfect and unchanging goodness of God and therefore the wicked come under God’s righteous judgment.<sup class="calibre6">38</sup></p>
<p class="sec"><b class="calibre8">Irenaeus</b></p>
<p class="pn">The Gnostics held that everything which exists, including God, formed one continuous whole. There was one contiguous chain of being which included the immutably perfect God at the apex and the passibly corrupt matter at the bottom. Between God and matter were placed a whole myriad (depending on the various schools) of lesser beings or aeons. While God was transcendent for the Gnostics, in that he was remote from the created realm (which he himself did not create but some lesser being, since for him to do so would have jeopardized his perfect transcendence) and could have no direct contact with it, he was, nonetheless, only relatively transcendent since he too was part of the whole.<sup class="calibre6">39</sup> By conceiving reality as such, the Gnostics could maintain both the unchangeable perfect transcendence of God and yet his, even if remote, relationship to it.<sup class="calibre6">40</sup></p>
<p class="in">In contradistinction to the Gnostic view of God and the pleroma of various aeons, Irenaeus (c. <small class="calibre10">AD</small>130–200) enunciated his Christian notion of God. While he was acquainted with the philosophy of his day, Irenaeus was far more the biblical theologian than the philosopher. It was with a <a id="page_91" class="calibre3"></a>mind and heart steeped in the Bible that Irenaeus forged his refutation of Gnosticism and equally his positive contribution to the Christian tradition. Thus, if we are to understand Irenaeus properly, we must grasp that the act of creation was for him the pivotal event which allowed him both to counter the gnostic teaching on God and to assert his own conception. The act of creation became, for Irenaeus, the fundamental hermeneutical principle which governed his conception of God and of God’s relation to the created order.</p>
<p class="in">Having given an account of the various gnostic teachings in Book 1 of <i class="calibre5">Adversus Haereses</i>, he writes at the onset of Book 2:</p>
<p class="bq1">It is proper, then, that I should begin with the first and most important head, that is, God the Creator, who made the heaven and the earth, and all things that are therein (whom these men blasphemously style the fruit of a defect), and to demonstrate that there is nothing either above him or after him; nor that, influenced by any one, but of his own free will, he created all things, since he is the only God, the only Lord, the only Creator, the only Father, alone containing all things, and himself commanding all things into existence.<sup class="calibre6">41</sup></p>
<p class="in">Placing the notion of creation at the centre of his theology allowed Irenaeus to do two absolutely essential things. First, as in the Hebrew scriptures, it establishes the wholly otherness of God in a manner that is far more radical than that of the Gnostics. God is not part of a contiguous whole, but absolutely (ontologically) distinct from all else that exists. Second and simultaneously, it establishes, as also found in the Bible, God’s immediate relationship to the created order.<sup class="calibre6">42</sup> We need to examine these two aspects more closely, if we are to appreciate what Irenaeus stated concerning God’s impassibility and his passionate love and goodness.</p>
<p class="in">To say, as some Gnostics did, that angels created the world would imply, for Irenaeus, that they were more powerful than God. God needs no help in creating. Rather the pre-eminence of God is manifested precisely in that he himself summoned all into existence out of <a id="page_92" class="calibre3"></a>nothing.<sup class="calibre6">43</sup> ‘God has pre-eminence, who alone is uncreated, the first of all things, and the primary cause of the existence of all.’ Human beings are to grow into the perfection of God, ‘for the Uncreated is perfect, that is, God.’<sup class="calibre6">44</sup> Because God is the uncreated Creator, he ‘ought not to be counted with other productions.’ Unlike all else then, God is ‘incomprehensible’ and ‘without figure’ and ‘shape.’ As Creator, God is then ‘distinct’ from all else, and unlike them, he is ‘both without beginning and end, and lacking nothing. He is himself sufficient for himself; and still further, he grants to all others this very thing, existence.’<sup class="calibre6">45</sup> God, therefore, is ‘truly and for ever the same, and always remaining the same unchangeable Being.’<sup class="calibre6">46</sup> Moreover, since he cannot be ‘reckoned with an Aeon,’ which is ‘subject to passion, God is impassible.’<sup class="calibre6">47</sup></p>
<p class="in">The Gnostics distance God from the world and refuse to allow him to be Creator lest he entangle himself in evil. They limit the knowledge of God to the few, and yet ‘they endow him with human affections and passions.’ If the Gnostics had known the scriptures, they would have comprehended that God is not as men are (Is. 55:8).</p>
<p class="bq1">The Father of all is at a vast distance from those affections and passions which operate among men. He is a simple, uncompounded Being, without diverse members, and altogether like and equal to himself, since he is wholly understanding, and wholly spirit, and wholly thought, and wholly intelligence, and wholly reason, and wholly hearing, and wholly seeing, and wholly light, and the whole source of all that is good.<sup class="calibre6">48</sup></p>
<p class="in">Despite this grand description of God, Irenaeus next states that God ‘is, however, above [all] these properties, and therefore indescribable.’<sup class="calibre6">49</sup> While he may understand and be light, he is so in a way that is unlike human understanding or created light. All of these attributes ‘are names of those perfections which always exist in God, so far as it is possible and proper for men to hear and to speak of God. For with the name of God the following words will harmonize: intelligence, word, life, incorruption, truth, wisdom, goodness, and such like.’<sup class="calibre6">50</sup></p>
<p class="in">The above passages clearly testify that Irenaeus, unlike Justin, is utterly imbued with the biblical tradition. In arguing against Marcion and the Gnostics, he is defending what he believes is the correct biblical view of God. We perceive Irenaeus following the now common tradition, found in the Bible itself, of negating of God anything that would place him within the created realm.<sup class="calibre6">51</sup> He transcends all that he makes, and thus <a id="page_93" class="calibre3"></a>he cannot be numbered among them. It is for this reason that Irenaeus denies of God changeability and passibility. Unlike creatures, who grow in perfection or suffer the desires and passions of sin, God is wholly perfect in himself and so is immutable and impassible in his perfection. As we saw in previous authors, to state, as Irenaeus does, that God is unchangeable and impassible, does not then tell us what God is, but what God is not. He is not like changeable and passible creatures because he is perfect in his eternal goodness and love.</p>
<p class="in">This is why Irenaeus does not give any indication that such a view of God disallows him from simultaneously professing that God is equally all good, loving, and merciful. Nor does he evidence any concern that God’s immutability and impassibility might jeopardize his action in the world on behalf of humankind. This lack of concern on Irenaeus’ part is not due to an absence of philosophical sophistication, but rather to his innate grasp of the Bible and the philosophy inherent within it. For Irenaeus, the Creator, who is wholly other than all else that is, is precisely the same Creator who is all good and loving. What holds the transcendent otherness of God and the immanent presence and action of God together is the act of creation. Unlike the Gnostics, who denied that God was the Creator and so held him to be infinitely distant from the corruptible world, unable to be present to it and forbidden to act within it, Irenaeus stressed that the good God brought into existence a good creation, and so he and what he had made were thoroughly compatible. He providentially cares for and loves what he has made.<sup class="calibre6">52</sup></p>
<p class="in">Thus Irenaeus can write that ‘God formed man at the first, because of his munificence.’<sup class="calibre6">53</sup> Moreover, ‘the love of God, being rich and ungrudging, confers upon the suppliant more than he can ask from it.’<sup class="calibre6">54</sup> God had need of nothing, but granted ‘communion with Himself to those who stood in need.’<sup class="calibre6">55</sup> God ‘is rich in all things, and all things are his. It is fitting, therefore, that the creation itself, being restored to its primeval condition, should without restraint be under the dominion of the righteous.’<sup class="calibre6">56</sup> The compatibility between God as the wholly other Creator and God as the providential provider is witnessed when Irenaeus writes:</p>
<p class="bq1">With God there are simultaneously exhibited power, wisdom, and goodness. His power and goodness [appear] in this, that of his own will he called into being and fashioned things which had no previous existence; his wisdom [is shown] in his having made created things parts of one harmonious and consistent whole; and those things which, through his super-eminent kindness, receive growth and a long period of existence, do reflect the glory of the uncreated One, of that God who bestows what is good ungrudgingly.<sup class="calibre6">57</sup></p>
<p class="in"><a id="page_94" class="calibre3"></a>Unlike Marcion, who speaks of two Gods, one just and the other loving, Irenaeus holds that the one God must be good, just and wise. ‘For he is good, and merciful, and patient, and saves whom he ought: nor does goodness desert Him in the exercise of justice, nor is his wisdom lessened; for he saves those whom he should save, and judges those worthy of judgement. Neither does he show himself unmercifully just; for his goodness, no doubt, goes on before, and takes precedence.‘<sup class="calibre6">58</sup> The eternally perfect God, who is incorruptible, ultimately gives to those who are faithful to him his very own incorruptibility and immortality.<sup class="calibre6">59</sup></p>
<p class="in">While, for Irenaeus, God is immutable and impassible in that he does not undergo the negative changes and inimical passions which are the lot of the created order, he is nonetheless passionate. Hallman notes that Irenaeus held that we obtain some knowledge of God ‘by comparing the divine with human personality. If one pursued this line of reasoning, is God not also total receptivity, total sympathy, and total love? Although it is a possible consequence of his argument, Irenaeus does not see this important application.’<sup class="calibre6">60</sup> Hallman not only misrepresents Irenaeus, as the above texts show, but he also completely misses his logic. God is, for Irenaeus, ‘total sympathy, and total love’ precisely because his mercy and love are not predicated of a changeable being. For God to be impassible and immutable is not to deny love and compassion of him, but to establish in his unchangeably perfect being a love that is absolutely and utterly passionate.<sup class="calibre6">61</sup></p>
<p class="in">Hallman exemplifies here a common mistake made by many contemporary critics of God’s impassibility. They consistently argue that for God to be impassible means that he is unloving. This is not so. They forget that to say that God is impassible does not tell us something positive about God – that he is inert, static and lifeless and so not loving, kind and compassionate. Rather, to say that God is impassible, as Irenaeus does, is to deny of God all those characteristics and properties of the created order which would render him less than perfectly good, loving, and merciful.</p>
<p class="in">In summary, God as the Creator, for Irenaeus, is the one who truly <i class="calibre5">is</i>, for he brings all else into existence. As such, in accordance with the Hebrew scriptures, he is both absolutely other than all else and simultaneously and immediately present to and active within creation. Because God is the one who truly <i class="calibre5">is</i>, unlike the changing order of creation, he is impassibly flawless and abidingly perfect in his passionate love. Irenaeus’ view of God and of his relationship to the created order is then quite the antithesis to that of Greek philosophy, his gnostic <a id="page_95" class="calibre3"></a>opponents having much in common with it. Rather, Irenaeus, while frequently employing words prevalent within the Hellenic philosophical tradition, such as immutability and impassibility, radically altered their signification so as to conform them to and to give affirmation of the Hebraic and Christian truth about God and his love and goodness.<sup class="calibre6">62</sup></p>
<p class="sec"><b class="calibre8">Clement of Alexandria</b></p>
<p class="pn">The Christian philosopher Clement of Alexandria (c. <small class="calibre10">AD</small>150–215) exemplifies and intensifies much of what we have already found in Justin Martyr, and therefore I will only briefly consider him here. Influenced by Philo and Middle Platonic thought Clement, conceptually and linguistically, offers an even more radically negative notion of God’s transcendence. This is coupled with his Stoic ethic which negatively regards passions and desires as the source of all evil. However, what saves Clement from completely hellenizing the Gospel is his belief that God is the good Creator, who possesses a wise and providential love and care for humankind.<sup class="calibre6">63</sup> This is especially manifested in the Incarnation.<sup class="calibre6">64</sup></p>
<p class="in">For Clement then, God is ‘one, indestructible, unbegotten’ with an existence that is ‘true and eternal.’<sup class="calibre6">65</sup> As the Creator, God is ‘unborn,’ ‘immortal,’ and in want of nothing for he neither grows nor changes.<sup class="calibre6">66</sup> Since God is the ‘first principle’ and ‘cause of all other things.’ he is ‘neither genus, nor difference, nor species, nor individual, nor number; nay more, is neither an event, nor that to which an event happens. No one can rightly express him wholly.’ We may refer to him as ‘One, or the Good, or Mind, or Absolute Being, or Father, or God, or Creator, or Lord,’ yet ‘each one by itself does not express God; but all together are indicative of the power of the Omnipotent.’ In the end God cannot be ‘apprehended by the science of demonstration’ since God is beyond all conception.<sup class="calibre6">67</sup> So transcendent is the one God that he is ‘beyond one and above the Monad itself.’<sup class="calibre6">68</sup></p>
<p class="in">Such a negative view of God may seem to place him beyond the reach of humankind, existing in a realm that is utterly devoid of contact with the created order. However, when Clement asserts that God is beyond the One and the Monad in his transcendence, he wishes only to emphasize that God cannot be classified. He cannot be numbered among all else that exists. No concept can contain him. He is incomprehensible. Nonetheless, with such an understanding of God, Clement, not <a id="page_96" class="calibre3"></a>surprisingly, insists particularly that God, unlike human beings, is immutable and impassible.<sup class="calibre6">69</sup></p>
<p class="in">What may be surprising is Clement’s equal insistence on God’s love, goodness, and compassion. He hates nothing that he has made, but ‘loves them.’</p>
<p class="bq1">Much more than the rest, and with reason, will he love man, the noblest of all objects created by him, and a God-loving being. Therefore God is loving; consequently the Word is loving. But he who loves anything wishes to do it good. And that which does good must be in every way better than that which does not good. But nothing is better than the Good. The Good, then does good. And God is admitted to be good. God therefore does good. And the Good, in virtue of its being good, does nothing else than good. Consequently God does all good.<sup class="calibre6">70</sup></p>
<p class="in">While Clement denies that we can ascribe human passions and affections to God, he continues to state that if we pity one another, how much more does God show pity to us.</p>
<p class="bq1">God being by nature rich in pity, in consequence of his own goodness, cares for us, neither through portions of himself, nor by nature of his children. And this is the greatest proof of the goodness of God: that such being our relation to him, and being by nature wholly estranged, he nevertheless cares for us.</p>
<p class="pn">Animals care for their offspring, and human beings have a natural affinity for one another, but ‘the mercy of God is rich toward us, who are in no respect related to him; I say either in our essence or nature, or in the peculiar energy of our essence, but only in our being the work of his will.’<sup class="calibre6">71</sup> God’s love for us is ‘ineffable.’<sup class="calibre6">72</sup></p>
<p class="in">Again with Clement, even within his negativity, we recognize that he maintains the passionate goodness and compassion of God. God’s immutability and impassibility only tell us what God is not. His passionate love, compassion and goodness tell us what God is.<sup class="calibre6">73</sup> However, we apprehend these, not by reason, but ‘by divine grace, and by the Word alone that proceeds from him.’<sup class="calibre6">74</sup> While Clement may at <a id="page_97" class="calibre3"></a>times portray God and the Christian life in a rather grim and unattractive light, yet he does so only to emphasize that God and our life with him stand on a unique plain.<sup class="calibre6">75</sup></p>
<p class="sec"><b class="calibre8">Origen</b></p>
<p class="pn">Of much greater interest is Origen (c. <small class="calibre10">AD</small>185–254) for he gives more explicit scope to the passion of God, and so could be seen to undermine the tradition of his impassibility.<sup class="calibre6">76</sup> Origen wished to be both a faithful man of the church and a reconciler of the gospel with his inherited Middle Platonic tradition and the nascent Neoplatonism of his day. His understanding of God bears the marks of all of these.</p>
<p class="in">Since both are spiritual, Origen holds that there is ‘a certain affinity between the mind and God,’ and thus humankind ‘is able to have some perception of the divine nature.’<sup class="calibre6">77</sup> While God, like the sun, cannot be perceived in the fullness of his glory and so is incomprehensible, yet his works portray, as rays, his splendor.<sup class="calibre6">78</sup></p>
<p class="bq1">God therefore must not be thought to be any kind of body, nor to exist in a body, but to be simple intellectual existence, so that he cannot be believed to have in himself a more or a less, but is Unity (<i class="calibre5">Monas</i>), or if I may so say, Oneness (<i class="calibre5">Henas</i>) throughout, and the mind and fount from which originates all intellectual existence or mind.<sup class="calibre6">79</sup></p>
<p class="paft">Because he, unlike creation, does not partake of movement or change, ‘<i class="calibre5">God does not even participate in being</i>. For he is participated in, rather than participates.’<sup class="calibre6">80</sup></p>
<p class="in">Origen, in these passages, is emphasizing that God cannot be placed within or numbered among all else that exists, and therefore he does not ‘participate’ in their being. Rather, he is the source of all that exists, and thus all that does exist participates in his being. Here again we see Origen establishing the otherness of God on the act of creation.</p>
<p class="in">Because he is wholly other, one must not take literally those passages of scripture which speak of God being angry or repenting, or subject to any other human emotion, for ‘God must be believed to be entirely <a id="page_98" class="calibre3"></a>without passion and destitute of all these emotions.’ Passages in the Old or the New Testament which speak of God’s anger or emotion must be given ‘the spiritual meaning in them, endeavouring to understand them in a way that is worthy of God.’<sup class="calibre6">81</sup></p>
<p class="in">While Origen frequently speaks of the anger of God, he consistently interprets it, not as something God actually possesses in reaction to sin, but as a means of correcting the sinner. ‘We do not attribute human passions to God, nor do we hold impious opinions about him.’<sup class="calibre6">82</sup> ‘God’s anger is not to be considered a passion. How can an impassible being have a passion? God does not suffer, he is immutable.’<sup class="calibre6">83</sup></p>
<p class="in">Arguing against the materialism of the Stoics, where God is corruptible and alterable, Origen states that ‘the doctrine of Jews and Christians preserves the unchangeable and unalterable nature of God.’<sup class="calibre6">84</sup> Against the claim of Celsus that if God comes down from heaven and enters into the affairs of man, he must undergo change, Origen maintains in accordance with scripture (Ps. 101:28 and Mal. 3:6) that, ‘while remaining unchanged in essence, he comes down in his providence and care over human affairs’ for the true conception of God’s nature is that he is ‘entirely incorruptible, simple, uncompounded and indivisible.’<sup class="calibre6">85</sup> While the scriptures portray God as seeing, hearing and with bodily parts, it would be foolish to take these literally, for no ‘change takes place in God either in action or in thought.’<sup class="calibre6">86</sup></p>
<p class="in">In contrast to this strong defense of God’s immutable and impassible nature, Origen can also speak with great conviction about the passion of God. Origen believes that if one begs a human person for pity, if he is not callous of heart, but suffers on account of one’s need, then he will respond in compassion.</p>
<p class="bq1">Something of this sort I would have you suppose concerning the Saviour. He came down to earth in pity for human kind, he endured our passions and sufferings before he suffered the cross, and he deigned to assume our flesh. For if he had not suffered he would not have entered into full participation in human life. He first suffered, then he came down and was manifested. What is that passion which he suffered for us? It is the passion of love. The Father himself and the God of the whole universe is ‘long-suffering, full of mercy and pity’ (Ps. 86:15). Must he not then, in some sense, be exposed to suffering? So you must realize that in his dealing with men he suffers human passions. ‘For the Lord thy God bore thy ways, even as a man bears his own son’ (Deut. 1:31). Thus God bears our ways, just as the son of God bears our ‘passions’. The Father himself is not impassible. If he is besought he shows pity and compassion; he feels, in some sort, the passion of love, and is exposed to what he cannot be <a id="page_99" class="calibre3"></a>exposed to in respect of his greatness, and for us men he endures the passion of mankind.<sup class="calibre6">87</sup></p>
<p class="in">Clearly Origen is here asserting that not only does the Son of God suffer as man, but also that the motivation for becoming man was precisely in the suffering he experienced in his divine state prior to becoming man. Equally, and of even greater significance, Origen affirms that the Father too suffers and that he is not impassible.</p>
<p class="in">In another homily Origen also notes that God and heaven rejoice over the repentant sinner and so ‘as our good actions and our progress in virtue produce gladness and rejoicing for God and the angels, so I feel does our evil way of life bring about lamentation and mourning not only on earth but also in heaven; and it may well be that men’s sins afflict with grief even God himself.’ Origen continues by graphically depicting God lamenting and crying over sinful man, yet he concludes: ‘Now all of these passages where God is said to lament, or rejoice, or hate, or be glad, are to be understood as spoken by Scripture in metaphorical and human fashion. For the divine nature is remote from all affection and of passion and change, remaining ever unmoved and untroubled in its own summit of bliss.’<sup class="calibre6">88</sup></p>
<p class="in">While Origen can sometimes be inconsistent in what he says, his inconsistency is normally found within his speculative theology. Being the pre-eminent scripture scholar that he was, he habitually interpreted the Bible in a consistent fashion. What then are we to make of Origen’s seeming inconsistency when it comes to the question of God’s impassible or passible nature? Mozley holds that ultimately Origen retreats ‘within the fortifications of the allegorical method of Scripture,’ and so his statements concerning divine passibility cannot be taken seriously.<sup class="calibre6">89</sup> Hallman believes that Origen is just plain inconsistent, but that his inconsistency is significant in itself.<sup class="calibre6">90</sup></p>
<p class="in">What these scholars fail to recognize is that Origen is attempting to make, maybe for the first time explicitly, the distinction that we have seen made implicitly throughout this chapter. Origen upholds both the impassibility of God and the passion of God. To say that God is impassible is to deny emotional change of states within God. It is a negative way of upholding the absolute otherness of God and of his radical perfection. Thus, while God does not undergo any passible change of <a id="page_100" class="calibre3"></a>emotional states, yet, because of his immutable perfection, he is perfect in his passionate love for humankind. Note that Origen states twice that the suffering that God endures over the fallen condition of man is ‘the passion of love.’ The Father is ‘not impassible,’ not in the sense that he changes from not suffering to suffering, but in the sense that, in his unchangeable love, he passionately grieves over his people. The suffering that God endures is not due to a change in his love, but is subsumed by and predicated upon his impassible and unchangeable perfect love. This is why Origen insists that the scripture passages which speak of God’s emotions must be interpreted metaphorically, and yet without denying the reality of which they speak. The emotions ascribed to God in the Bible are metaphorical in that they do not predicate of him states of emotional change as is universally the case with humans, but rather they predicate aspects of God’s immutable passionate love for humankind.<sup class="calibre6">91</sup></p>
<p class="sec"><b class="calibre8">Tertullian</b></p>
<p class="pn">Until now we have studied only Greek Fathers. (Irenaeus, though Bishop of Lyon, grew up in the East and wrote in Greek.) Before we conclude this chapter, we need briefly to examine a few of the early Latin Fathers – Tertullian, Novatian, and Lactantius. We will find in them the same basic concerns and issues that we have met within the early Greek Fathers.</p>
<p class="in">Concerning the passibility and impassibility of God, scholars find in Tertullian’s (c. <small class="calibre10">AD</small>160–240) thought similar tensions (inconsistencies) to those found in Origen’s. To grasp the logic of Tertullian’s teaching on the passibility and impassibility of God, we must place it within his understanding of God’s goodness.</p>
<p class="in">Tertullian sets out what he calls the ‘rules for examining God’s goodness.’ The first is that God does not become good by doing good things. Rather it is because he is good that he does good things, such as create. God’s goodness is constitutive of who he is as God and so is an eternal attribute. ‘In God, therefore, goodness is required to be both perpetual and unbroken, such as, being stored up and kept ready in the treasures of his natural properties.’<sup class="calibre6">92</sup> God’s goodness must not only be an eternal property of who he is, but it must also be rational, that is, it must be used in a rational manner.<sup class="calibre6">93</sup> Moreover, because God is good and rational, ‘so, I think, he is perfect in all things.’<sup class="calibre6">94</sup> It is only in the light of this understanding of God’s goodness that we can properly discern Tertullian’s rendering of God’s ‘passibility.’</p>
<p class="in">Now Marcion wished to attribute only goodness, and not anger, to the God of the New Testament. However, Tertullian argues that for God to be simply good without possessing the other sensations and attributes <a id="page_101" class="calibre3"></a>would mean that God is not good at all. God’s goodness demands that he be angry over sin and that he judges evil. Such emotions are not incompatible with God’s nature because they are constitutive of what it means for God to be eternally, rationally, and perfectly good.<sup class="calibre6">95</sup></p>
<p class="in">For Tertullian, while God is good in himself, this goodness expresses itself then in accordance with the changing created order. ‘Up to the fall of man, therefore, from the beginning God was simply good; after that he became a judge both severe and, as the Marcionites will have it, cruel.’<sup class="calibre6">96</sup> For Tertullian God’s justice directs his goodness ‘according to men’s application for it.’</p>
<p class="bq1">And this is the result; the divine goodness, being interrupted in that free course whereby God was spontaneously good, is now dispensed according to the deserts of every man; it is offered to the worthy, denied to the unworthy, taken away from the unthankful, and also avenged on all its enemies. Thus the entire office of justice in this respect becomes an agency for goodness: whatever it condemns by judgement, whatever (to use your phrase) it ruthlessly pursues, it, in fact, benefits with good instead of injuring.<sup class="calibre6">97</sup></p>
<p class="in">What must be grasped here is that, for Tertullian, goodness is the primary and foundational attribute of God. It is what makes God truly God. All other emotions or attributes are simply expressions of his goodness administered in various ways to meet various situations. Does this mean that God, for Tertullian, changes emotional states? On one level, the simple answer is yes. Depending upon the changing circumstances of human life, God’s goodness will be expressed and experienced in different manners – anger toward the sinner, mercy toward the repentant. On another level, and I believe the deeper level, the answer is no. The differing expressions are but the expressions of the one constitutive attribute of God – his unchanging rational and perfect goodness. Thus, while God himself does not change – he is eternally and perfectly good – yet the mode of the expression of his goodness changes and the experience of his goodness changes in accordance with the change in the human situation and circumstance. It is because of this twofold reality – the unchangeableness of God’s goodness and the various expressions of it – that Tertullian qualified what it means for God to exhibit different emotional states.</p>
<p class="in">In <i class="calibre5">Adversus Marcionem</i>, 2, 16 Tertullian argues that while Marcion would hold that such emotions as anger imply that God is corruptible and mortal, he maintains that, while this may be true of human beings, it is not true of God. The nature of man and the nature of God are radically different. Therefore we must ‘discriminate between the natures, and assign to them their respective senses, which are as diverse as their natures require.’ While the Bible attributes to God hands, eyes and feet, what they designate about God is far different from what they designate about human beings. Similarly, while we can speak of God’s sensations <a id="page_102" class="calibre3"></a>and emotions, they too designate something radically different of God from what they designate of humankind. ‘These sensations in the human being are rendered just as corrupt by the corruptibility of man’s substance, as in God they are rendered incorruptible by the incorruption of the divine essence.’ Because God is God ‘he is undoubtedly diverse from every sort of human condition.’ This does not mean that God is without emotion. Rather it means that God possesses emotions in a divine manner. It is not that God possesses human emotions, but rather that man possesses divine emotions. It is ‘palpably absurd of you to be placing human characteristics in God rather than divine ones in man, and clothing God in the likeness of man, instead of man in the image of God. And this, therefore, is to be deemed the likeness of God in man, that the human soul has the same emotions and sensations as God, although they are not of the same kind; differing as they do both in their conditions and their issues according to their nature.’ Goodness is ‘the very parent’ of all sensations and therefore God is not only meek, patient, and merciful, but he can also be angry. Being perfectly good, God possesses all of these perfectly. Moreover, unlike us, God’s anger is subsumed into his happiness. ‘God alone is truly happy, by reason of his property of incorruptibility. Angry he will possibly be, but not irritated, nor dangerously tempted; he will be moved but not subverted.’ God must exhibit the full range of emotions in order to cover all the contingencies of the world and human life –</p>
<p class="bq1">anger because of the wicked, and indignation because of the ungrateful, and jealousy because of the proud, and whatsoever else is a hindrance to the evil. So, again mercy on account of the erring, and patience on account of the impenitent, and pre-eminent resources on account of the meritorious, and whatsoever is necessary to the good. All these affections he is moved by in that peculiar manner of his own, in which it is profoundly fit that he should be affected; and it is owing to him that man is also similarly affected in a way which is equally his own.<sup class="calibre6">98</sup></p>
<p class="in">Once more we need to ask the question: Does Tertullian want to hold that God merely exhibits different emotional states which spring from his unchangeable and perfect goodness but which do not actually bring about a change in himself, or does he want to say that God actually undergoes diverse emotional states? It appears that he has not fully worked out a complete philosophical answer. Tertullian realized from scripture that anger, justice, and judgment have real meaning when predicated of God. Yet he equally does not wish these ‘emotions’ to jeopardize God’s perfect unchanging goodness, and even his happiness. This is why he consistently states that God possesses them in accordance with his perfect nature, and even that they must be attributed to God in a manner similar to the way ‘hands’ and ‘feet’ are attributed to God. While Tertullian does not explicitly state it, this seems to imply that, while they do predicate something true of God, they do so metaphorically. <a id="page_103" class="calibre3"></a>Tertullian is able to state more clearly how these ‘emotions’ do not apply to God than how they positively do apply to him. While he wishes to predicate them of God in some true manner, he positively predicates them of God by rejecting false manners of predication. This is another example of attempting to state something positive about the nature of God, but doing so through negation. The real problem is that Tertullian does not clearly state what it means for God to possess them in accordance with his nature, but it does at least mean that he does not possess them in a human manner, which does betoken change. Moreover, this is also why Tertullian can insist that, despite God’s seemingly differing emotional states, he is immutable.</p>
<p class="in">Against Hermogenes, Tertullian argues that, unlike temporal matter which is mutable, God is eternal and ‘eternity, however, cannot be lost, because it cannot be eternity, except by reason of its immunity from loss. For the same reason also it is incapable of change, inasmuch as, since it is eternity, it can by no means be changed.’<sup class="calibre6">99</sup> Moreover, while God cannot change for the worse by loss of his perfection, so neither can he change for the better, being eternally perfect. ‘God is the great Supreme, existing in eternity, unbegotten, unmade, without beginning, without end.’<sup class="calibre6">100</sup> Eternity places God outside time and therefore outside the realm of change. ‘Eternity has no time. It is itself all time. It acts; it cannot then suffer.’<sup class="calibre6">101</sup> God acts. He is not acted upon, and therefore he does not suffer change. For Tertullian, because God is eternally and perfectly good, he cannot suffer the changing and debilitating vicissitudes of time.</p>
<p class="in">Despite the ambiguity of expression and the unresolved philosophical issues, what Tertullian wishes to uphold has become quite clear. Because of God’s eternal, rational and perfect goodness, Tertullian believes that God, being eternal and so outside of time, is ontologically immutable and impassible (in the sense that he does not change emotional states). Moreover, he also wants to give true expression to God’s anger and justice for they are expressions of his perfect and unchanging goodness. What he has not been able to do is positively to conceive, philosophically, how both of these truths can be harmoniously reconciled. Again, as with previous Fathers, it is not that Tertullian is inconsistent, as if he were attempting to uphold two incompatible and irreconcilable truths, one scriptural and the other philosophical, and that a choice must be made between them, the right choice being that scripture teaches that God is changeable and passible. Rather, Tertullian very clearly grasped that two truths, both of which are scriptural, must be upheld – the complete otherness of God and the passionate vitality of his goodness – and he was desperately attempting to hold them together conceptually.<sup class="calibre6">102</sup></p>
<p class="sec"><a id="page_104" class="calibre2"></a><b class="calibre8">Novatian</b></p>
<p class="pn">Novatian (c. <small class="calibre10">AD</small>210–280) stressed God’s immutability and impassibility without wishing to deny his passion and vitality. In his work <i class="calibre5">De Trinitate</i> he systematically sets forth his arguments.</p>
<p class="in"><a id="page_105" class="calibre3"></a>The <i class="calibre5">Regula Fidei</i> (Rule of Faith) ‘requires that we should first of all believe in God the Father and Lord Omnipotent; that is, the absolutely perfect Founder of all things.’<sup class="calibre6">103</sup> The complete otherness of God is grasped from the fact that he is the Creator and so is radically different from all else that is. He is beyond all else. He has no beginning and no end. He is immortal and eternal and so does not exist within time. He is incomprehensible and so cannot be named.<sup class="calibre6">104</sup> God is perfectly good and thus the author of good.</p>
<p class="bq1">He, then, is always like to himself; nor does he ever turn or change himself into any forms, lest by change he should appear to be mortal…. Thus there is never in him any accession or increase of any part or honour, lest anything should appear to have ever been wanting to his perfection…. But what he is, he always is; and who he is, he is always himself; and what character he has he always has.<sup class="calibre6">105</sup></p>
<p class="in">Novatian makes reference to Malachi 3:6 and Exodus 3:14 both of which he believes uphold the fact that God truly is the ‘one who is’ and thus does not change. Because he is immutably perfect in every way he is ‘immortal and incorruptible.’<sup class="calibre6">106</sup></p>
<p class="in">Novatian is here clustering arguments that are now part of the patristic tradition. He wishes to uphold the absolute uniqueness and perfection of God, and he does so by asserting positive and negative <a id="page_106" class="calibre3"></a>attributes of him, which together complement and clarify one another. As the Creator God is wholly other than what he creates and thus he is positively all-perfect, all-good and eternal. In order to accentuate these positive attributes and to give more precise meaning to them, Novatian denies of God all that is constitutive of the created order. In contrast to the changeable, finite, and temporal creation, God is infinite, immutable, immortal, and incorruptible. These negative attributes then not only differentiate God from all that he created, but they also enhance his absolute and unchanging perfection. For Novatian, they in no way jeopardize his dynamic vitality, but rather they assure it. To say that God is immutable is to attest that God is eternally who he is in all his absolute goodness and love.</p>
<p class="in">Novatian uses this same line of argument when it comes to God’s anger. Yes, God can be angry and indignant, ‘yet we are not to understand these to be asserted of him in the sense in which they are human vices.’ These may corrupt man, they ‘cannot corrupt the divine power.’ The reason is that God is angry for our good. His anger is medicinal.<sup class="calibre6">107</sup> For Novatian then, God’s anger is not an indication of God’s mutability or passibility, but an expression of his immutable perfection and passionate goodness. We see here as well that Novatian is acutely aware that biblical language cannot always be taken literally even though the truth of what is said must be maintained. God does not really possess eyes, ears, or hands, yet God sees all, hears all and works ceaselessly.<sup class="calibre6">108</sup> Ultimately Novatian acknowledges that all human language and concepts fail to grasp the whole of who God is.<sup class="calibre6">109</sup></p>
<p class="sec"><b class="calibre8">Lactantius</b></p>
<p class="pn">Lactantius (c. <small class="calibre10">AD</small>240–320) was an ardent defender of the reality of God’s anger, so much so that he wrote a treatise entitled <i class="calibre5">De Ira Dei</i>. However, because his treatise is primarily pastoral rather than philosophical and because he presents similar arguments to those of Tertullian, though in a much more developed and systematic manner, he does not significantly advance the discussion.</p>
<p class="in">He states that many, for example, the Epicureans and the Stoics, deny anger of God either because God is beneficent and therefore anger would be inconsistent with his goodness, or because he does not take any notice of human affairs and therefore is not aroused to anger over human misdeeds.<sup class="calibre6">110</sup> However, Lactantius argues, to deny anger of God is to deny his goodness as well. God is not ‘inactive’ nor ‘at rest’ nor ‘unmoveable.’ Rather he is ever active in his care and governance of the world.<sup class="calibre6">111</sup></p>
<p class="bq1">For if God is not angry with the impious and the unrighteous, it is clear that he does not love the pious and the righteous…. Thus he who loves the good also hates the wicked, and he who does not hate <a id="page_107" class="calibre3"></a>the wicked does not love the good; because the loving of the good arises from the hatred of the wicked, and the hating of the wicked has its rise from the love of the good.<sup class="calibre6">112</sup></p>
<p class="paft">Echoing earlier authors, Lactantius states that without divine anger there would be no righteous fear of God.<sup class="calibre6">113</sup> God’s anger is an exercise of his divine authority.<sup class="calibre6">114</sup> While God has the affections, emotions, and attributes that befit his divine power, such as kindness, pity and anger, he does not possess those that are contrary to his nature, such as fear, want, injury, carnal passion, envy, infirmity, and death.<sup class="calibre6">115</sup> Because God is eternally perfect and virtuous, so too is his anger eternally perfect, but it is an anger that is completely under the control of his perfect will.<sup class="calibre6">116</sup> Therefore it is wrong ‘to represent God as being without emotions.’<sup class="calibre6">117</sup></p>
<p class="in">Here, as with Origen and Tertullian, we find God’s anger to be an expression of the more basic divine attributes, that of God’s goodness and love. What Lactantius fails to do, unlike Origen and Tertullian, is to grapple with the philosophical issues involved. His is a pastoral concern, and while he states that God exhibits anger in keeping with his perfect nature, he does not address the manner in which God is able to do this. This is especially significant since he equally wishes to uphold the tradition of God’s immutability and impassibility. There is one God ‘in whom complete energy and power can neither be lessened nor increased.’<sup class="calibre6">118</sup> He writes similarly in <i class="calibre5">Divinae Institutiones</i> that God ‘who is the Eternal Mind, is undoubtedly of excellence, complete and perfect in every part’ and, therefore, cannot be diminished or enhanced in any way.<sup class="calibre6">119</sup> Moreover, because God is the highest power, ‘he must be incorruptible, perfect, incapable of suffering, and subject to no other being.’<sup class="calibre6">120</sup> Likewise, because God is uncreated and the Creator of all, ‘that which is in him will always be permanent…. He is of himself … and therefore he is such as he willed that he should be, incapable of suffering, unchangeable, incorruptible, blessed, and eternal.’<sup class="calibre6">121</sup></p>
<p class="in">Lactantius exemplifies once again the common tradition that while God is immutable and impassible, this in no way denies that he is equally passionate – even in his anger. Implicit within his teaching is the notion that it is precisely the perfect and unchangeable goodness and love of God that allows him to be perfectly and eternally passionate even in his anger.</p>
<p class="sec"><a id="page_108" class="calibre2"></a><b class="calibre8">Conclusions</b></p>
<p class="pn">In closing this chapter on the early patristic doctrine of God and of his relationship to the created order, we can now draw together a number of conclusions. We want specifically to discern whether or not the early Greek and Latin Apologists were faithful to the Hebrew and Christian revelation of who God is in relation to the question of his impassibility or passibility. The conclusions will summarize and highlight what we have learned as a whole from our survey of the early patristic period, and will not, for the most part, retrace specific differences between and criticisms of the various Fathers.</p>
<p class="in">To read those contemporary theologians who criticize the patristic understanding of God, one would imagine that the Fathers were better acquainted with and faithful to Greek philosophy than to the Bible. The Fathers, as our survey shows, would be rightly puzzled at such a critique. While they evidently did use words and concepts taken from philosophy, they did so primarily, as our examination illustrates, either to show that biblical revelation was compatible with some of what philosophy taught, or to defend Christianity against philosophical attacks, or to demonstrate that Christianity actually provided better philosophical answers to the questions at hand. What the Fathers brought to the philosophical conversation, a conversation that had been in progress for centuries, was precisely the new data of the Christian faith – the revelation of the Hebrew and Christian scriptures. Whatever they said that was new was not due to their faithfulness to some philosophy, but to their fidelity to the scriptures. They were not philosophical innovators. They were theological innovators and their innovation was founded upon the Bible.</p>
<p class="in">Nonetheless, it is true that theological error and even heresy (in the case of Marcion and the Gnostics) came about precisely because the newness of Christian revelation did not adequately alter and satisfactorily reshape philosophical presuppositions and concepts. The philosophical conversation, which the early church joined, was not without its dangers. The present-day critics have adequately enumerated the pits into which the Fathers could and sometimes did fall. However, this chapter manifests that they, on the whole, did not fall into all the pits that they are alleged to have fallen into, nor then did they, on the whole, innocently, but nonetheless erroneously, abandon the God of Israel for the God of the Greeks.</p>
<p class="in">All of the early Fathers were concerned with upholding the complete otherness of the one God in relationship to the created order. In this they were true to the Hebrew and Christian revelation, and they professed this in a number of ways. First, they denied existence, on scriptural and philosophical grounds, to the anthropomorphic and mythological gods of the pagans and the Gnostics. They, in accordance with scripture and ‘true’ philosophy, insisted that there is but one God who transcends all else. Second, on behalf of this one transcendent God, they also argued, by stressing (with the exception of Justin Martyr), in accordance with the scriptures, that God was the Creator of all else that exists. They gave philosophical depth to the biblical notion of creation by clarifying, in <a id="page_109" class="calibre3"></a>opposition to ‘false’ Greek philosophy, that God created all out of nothing – <i class="calibre5">creatio ex nihilo</i>. God did not just form or order pre-existent matter, as in Platonic thought or set it in motion as in Aristotelianism, but was actually responsible for the existence of all that is. The notion of God as Creator then radically distinguished him from all else, and in a manner that was even more radical than that of Greek philosophy or gnostic thought. He did not just relatively transcend all else in that he was the pinnacle of a contiguous chain of being, but rather he transcended creation in that he constituted a distinct ontological order all his own, and so was not one of the things made. Thus he could not be numbered among them, nor could he then be contained in any species or genus. His mode of existence was entirely unique and distinct from that of the created order.</p>
<p class="in">For the early Fathers, the biblical and philosophical notion of God as Creator carried with it a number of consequences with regard to his attributes. Because God is the Creator, the Fathers positively held that he was outside of time and so eternal, without beginning or end. In accordance with scripture, and in contrast to the Gnostics and Marcion, he is the all perfect and all good God who created everything good by his almighty power. Moreover, because he is the all perfect author of all life and existence, he is the one who truly exists or is. This is the ultimate reason for his total perfection, his consummate goodness, and his almighty power. This, the Fathers believed, was in accordance with biblical revelation, especially as regards his revealed divine name, Yahweh – He Who Is.</p>
<p class="in">In order to accentuate these positive biblical attributes which accrued to God as Creator, the Fathers attributed to him a whole cluster of negative attributes some of which are directly biblical in origin and some of which stem more from philosophical reflection. For the Fathers, these negative attributes served a twofold purpose. They primarily were used to distinguish God from the created order, but in so doing they equally gave more noetic content to the positive attributes.<sup class="calibre6">122</sup></p>
<p class="in">In contrast to the world and to the anthropomorphic gods of the pagans, God is incorporeal. This not only helped distinguish him from the created order, it also denied of God all that is constitutive of bodily existence – literally having eyes, ears, hands, etc., and possessing physical feelings, passions, and needs, such as pain, lust, and hunger. It equally accentuated his spiritual nature, and thus, in whatever ways God <a id="page_110" class="calibre3"></a>may be like human beings, since he created them in his image and likeness, he is so only in a manner that is appropriate to and in conformity with his spiritual (divine) character. Moreover, because God, as Creator, could not be numbered among the things created and because he is all perfect, he is incomprehensible, and so could not be fully known nor named as are creatures. This, again, they believed to be in accordance with his revealed name, Yahweh – ‘I Am Who Am.’ God revealed his name as the one who could not be named. God is also infinite in the negative sense that he is in no way finite, that is, he does not possess any of the attributes which limit creatures, such as location, growth, development, imperfection, contingency, and time. To call God infinite also intensified more positively that, as Creator, he possesses unlimited power and life, and is omnipresent. As Creator, unlike creatures, he is also unbegotten and uncreated. This accentuated the eternal nature of God’s existence for it is constitutive of creaturely existence to come to be, to grow and develop, and to cease to be. God, as unbegotten and uncreated, in contrast, eternally is. Equally, because God is eternally the one who truly is, he, unlike creatures, is incorruptible and immortal. The unqualified nature of God’s existence is underlined in these two negative attributes. Nothing can corrupt the absolute perfection and power of the truly living God nor bring about his demise.</p>
<p class="in">In the light of this complementary and reciprocal interplay between these positive and negative attributes, the early Fathers insisted that God was immutable and impassible. Negatively, God is immutable in the sense that he does not change as do creatures, but he does not change for positive reasons. For the Fathers, and this is essential to understanding their doctrine of God, God’s immutability radically affirms and profoundly intensifies the absolute perfection and utter goodness of God, who as Creator, is the one who truly lives and exists. Thus, to say that God is immutable tells us, in the first instance, primarily what God is not. He, unlike creatures, does not change, in that, he can neither diminish in his goodness and perfection, nor can he increase in his goodness and perfection. Moreover, to say that God is immutable, again, accentuates that he is distinct from the changeable created order and so outside of time which marks these changes. But, the attribute of immutability equally affirms, in its denial, that God is then eternally the living God who is utterly dynamic in his goodness, love and perfection. There is no fluctuation or change within God which could in any way alter his comprehensive goodness and consummate love.</p>
<p class="in">Thus, there is little, if any, ground for the familiar criticism that the attribute of divine immutability transformed, within the teaching of the Fathers, the living and dynamic God of the Bible into the static and inert God of Greek philosophy. The problem is that contemporary critics of the Fathers consistently give to the attribute of divine immutability the positive noetic content of being static, lifeless and inert, something which the Fathers never argued for nor even contemplated. The Fathers grasped, as the contemporary critics do not, that to say that God is immutable is to deny those aspects of his nature – changes of a diminishing or of a developmental kind – which would jeopardize or render less than perfect his dynamic vitality as the one who truly is. While the <a id="page_111" class="calibre3"></a>Fathers may have snatched the attribute of immutability from the Greek philosophical vocabulary and tradition, they radically altered it so as to assert, in a philosophical manner, God’s unconditional goodness and unqualified love as revealed in the scriptures.</p>
<p class="in">Similarly, for the early Fathers (we see this especially in Irenaeus, Origen and Tertullian), while the divine attribute of impassibility primarily tells us what God is not, it does so for entirely positive reasons. God is impassible in that he does not undergo successive and fluctuating emotional states; nor can the created order alter him in such a way so as to cause him to suffer any modification or loss. Nor is God the victim of negative and sinful passions as are human beings, such as fear, anxiety, and dread, or greed, lust, and unjust anger. For the Fathers, to deny that God is passible is to deny of him all human passions and the effects of such passions which would in any way debilitate or cripple him as God. Thus, to say that God is impassible is again to ensure and to accentuate his perfect goodness and unalterable love. As I have argued throughout, the Fathers, almost universally, Justin and Clement being somewhat the exceptions, attributed impassibility to God in order to safeguard and enhance his perfect and dynamic passion – his all-consuming goodness and ardent love. Even those Fathers who argued, on biblical and pastoral grounds, for the reality of God’s anger did so from the perspective of his goodness and love. Anger, when applied to God, was not seen as a separate passion or an intermittent emotional state within God, but constitutive of his unchanging perfect goodness and providential care, and so must be predicated of God in a manner suitable to divine nature.</p>
<p class="in">As we have noted throughout this chapter, the contemporary critics invariably accuse those Fathers who uphold the impassibility of God as well as his love, compassion, mercy and anger of being inconsistent. This accusation is founded upon the false premise that to be impassible is to be devoid of passion. This, again, the Fathers never argued for nor even countenanced. The Fathers denied of God those passions which, they believed, would imperil or impair those positive attributes which were constitutive of his divine nature – his goodness and love. And equally then, such a denial amplified the intensity of these same unchangeably perfect passions.<sup class="calibre6">123</sup> The Fathers wished to preserve the wholly otherness <a id="page_112" class="calibre3"></a>of God, as found in scripture, and equally, also in accordance with scripture, to profess and enrich an understanding of his passionate goodness and love that was truly in keeping with his wholly otherness.<sup class="calibre6">124</sup></p>
<p class="in">Lastly, it cannot be over-emphasized that it is the act of creation that scripturally and philosophically grounded the early Christian understanding of God and distinguished its doctrine of God from that of the Greek philosophical tradition. While it established the inherent ontological otherness of God, in a manner far more radical than that of the Greek philosophical and gnostic traditions, yet it simultaneously fixed his immediate and unmediated presence to the created order. Thus, for the Fathers, God, in accordance with the scriptures, could act within the created order as the wholly other without losing his wholly otherness in so doing.</p>
<p class="in">Consequently, the early patristic doctrine of God was fundamentally faithful to the biblical notion of God and of his relationship to the created order, and this was so precisely because they took as their source and inspiration, not Greek philosophy, but the Bible itself. They maintained the biblical mystery of who God is while attempting to clarify and to enhance it through the use of philosophy.</p>
<p class="in">However, the early Fathers left a few important questions unanswered. They did not fully treat, philosophically, what it is about the very being of God which allows him to create. Yes, he is all powerful, eternal, perfectly good and loving. But what is it that constitutes him as all powerful, eternal, perfectly good and loving? What, philosophically, establishes the complete otherness of God, and simultaneously allows him to act within and interact with the created order, especially in relation to human beings, as the wholly other without losing his wholly otherness in so doing? What founds God’s immutable and impassible perfect nature, and simultaneously founds his ability to relate to the changeable created order with all of his passionate goodness and love? These, and similar questions will be discussed and, it is hoped, answered in the next chapter.</p>
<p class="ntcon">1  R.L. Wilken writes: ‘In restating the Christian doctrine of God within the Graeco-Roman world, Christian thinkers sought out points of contact between biblical language of God’s transcendence and Greek philosophical conceptions of the nature of God.’ <i class="calibre5">Remembering the Christian Past</i> (Grand Rapids: Eerdmans, 1995), p. 38.</p>
<p class="ntnlf">2  A couple of theologians, who espouse a passible God, do note that there are differences between the Greek philosophic notion of God’s impassibility where God is unsympathetic, apathetic and static, and the Judeo-Christian notion of God’s impassibility espoused by the Fathers where God is alive and active. See Sarot, <i class="calibre5">God, Passibility and Corporeality</i>, pp. 44–48, and his ‘Divine Suffering: Continuity and Discontinuity with the Tradition,’ <i class="calibre5">Anglican Theological Review</i>, 78/2 (1996):226. F.J. van Beeck writes:</p>
<p class="bq1f">Hermeneutically speaking, therefore, it is unwise and superficial for contemporary theologians to hint that the massive patristic affirmation of <i class="calibre5">apatheia</i> as a divine attribute is simply an example of the Church making common cause with Greek philosophy as well as protecting its socio-political privilege by projecting status and stoicism onto Christ and the Father by way of a divine attribute. The patristic tradition’s indubitable respect for Greek philosophy was exceeded only by its eclectic use of it. If anything, its sheer consistency on the subject of divine impassibility was theological. We are well advised, therefore, to be careful in treating the subject – more careful, in fact, than some of the otherwise commendable theologians mentioned above have been. ‘This Weakness of God’s is Stronger,’ p. 18.</p>
<p class="ntnl">G. Hanratty, who defends God’s impassibility, equally claims that the charge leveled against the Fathers of succumbing to Greek philosophy is without foundation. See ‘Divine Immutability and Impassibility Revisited’ in <i class="calibre5">At the Heart of the Real</i>, ed. F. O’Rourke (Dublin: Irish Academic Press, 1992), pp. 146–48. See also Henry, <i class="calibre5">On Not Understanding God</i>, pp. 94–113.</p>
<p class="ntnlf">3  The heart of the difficulty may be that many contemporary theologians, as we will see, have failed to understand correctly the philosophical tradition supporting the impassibility of God. They misconceive and so misinterpret and misrepresent the Fathers and Aquinas. This failure has forced them to jettison the tradition and to search instead for something more philosophically persuasive.</p>
<p class="ntnlf">4  While, in examining the patristic tradition, I will argue for the impassibility of God, the full and complete arguments will have to await the next chapter when the even deeper philosophical issues raised within the patristic tradition are examined and addressed by Aquinas.</p>
<p class="ntnlf">5  The early Fathers, more than the later, engaged in discussion with the then dominant pagan culture and philosophical tradition. From within this apologetic dialogue they defended and promoted the intellectual integrity of the gospel, and so were primarily responsible for originating and developing the Christian doctrine of God and of his relationship to the created order. Also, because of this intense colloquy with the Greek philosophical tradition, we will be able to discern more clearly whether or not the early Fathers were more faithful to the scriptures or to the philosophy of their age. Therefore, this chapter will only address these early issues. The concerns of the later Fathers focused more on specific Christian issues, such as the Trinity and the Incarnation, and so I will not treat here the patristic understanding of the Incarnation and its doctrinal formulation within the early councils. How the Son of God, who is God as the Father is God, experiences a full human life – birth, suffering and death – will be the subject of a later chapter.</p>
<p class="ntnlf">6  Pelikan, <i class="calibre5">The Christian Tradition I</i>, p. 229 Also see Grant, <i class="calibre5">The Early Christian Doctrine of God</i>, pp. 10, 13–15, 21, 111–14.</p>
<p class="ntnlf">7  See C. Andresen, ‘Justine und die mittlere Platonismus,’ <i class="calibre5">Zeitschrift für die neutestamentliche Wissenschaft</i> 44 (1952–53):157–95; M. Edwards, ‘On the Platonic Schooling of Justin Martyr,’ <i class="calibre5">Journal of Theological Studies</i> 42 (1991):17–34; E.R. Goodenough, <i class="calibre5">The Theology of Justin Martyr</i> (Jena, 1923; and reprinted Amsterdam: Philo Press, 1968), pp. 1–56; R. Holte, ‘Spermatikos Logos,’ <i class="calibre5">Studia Theologica</i> 12 (1958):123–18 and 147–48; D.T. Runia, <i class="calibre5">Philo in Early Christian Literature</i> (Assen: Van Gorcu, 1993), pp. 97–105.</p>
<p class="ntnlf">8  <i class="calibre5">Apologia</i>, 1, 9. See also 10.</p>
<p class="ntnlf">9  <i class="calibre5">Apologia</i>, 2, 6.</p>
<p class="ntull">10  <i class="calibre5">Dialogus cum Tryphone</i>, 5.</p>
<p class="ntull">11  <i class="calibre5">Apologia</i>, 1, 13.</p>
<p class="ntull">12  <i class="calibre5">Apologia</i>, 1, 20. Justin refutes Stoic pantheism by arguing that such a notion of God implies change and corruptibility which is impossible for God to undergo. See <i class="calibre5">Apologia</i>, 2, 7 and <i class="calibre5">Dialogus</i>, 127.</p>
<p class="ntull">13  <i class="calibre5">Apologia</i>, 1, 25.</p>
<p class="ntull">14  <i class="calibre5">Dialogus</i>, 3.</p>
<p class="ntull">15  Justin speaks of God’s solicitude and even sorrow over humankind’s sinful plight. See <i class="calibre5">Apologia</i>, 1, 28 and 44; <i class="calibre5">Dialogus</i>, 1.</p>
<p class="ntull">16  L.W. Barnard, <i class="calibre5">Justin Martyr: His Life and Thought</i> (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1967), p. 81. See also pp. 75–84. Also see Hallman, <i class="calibre5">The Descent of God</i>, pp. 31–32.</p>
<p class="ntull">17  <i class="calibre5">Dialogus</i>, 127.</p>
<p class="ntull">18  See <i class="calibre5">Dialogus</i>, 56 and 127.</p>
<p class="ntull">19  See <i class="calibre5">Dialogus</i>, 56, 58, and 126.</p>
<p class="ntull">20  <i class="calibre5">Dialogus</i>, 60. Because Justin conceives the Logos as emanating out from the Father, he holds that the Logos is divine. However, since he does emanate out from the Father, as the spatial intermediary between the Father and the created order, he is not as divine as the Father is divine. See <i class="calibre5">Dialogus</i>, 56 and <i class="calibre5">Apologia</i>, 1, 63.</p>
<p class="ntull">21  It would seem, for Justin, that the Logos must be less divine than the Father not only because he emanates out from the Father, but also because he is ‘in touch’ with the created order. If the Logos embodied the whole of the Godhead, he too would be unable to be present to and immanently active within time and history.</p>
<p class="ntnl">For fuller studies of Justin’s understanding of God and the Logos, see Barnard, <i class="calibre5">Justin Martyr</i>; M. Edwards, ‘Justin’s Logos and the Word of God,’ <i class="calibre5">Journal of Early Christian Studies</i> 3/3 (1995):261–80; Goodenough, <i class="calibre5">The Theology of Justin Martyr</i>; R. Grant, <i class="calibre5">Greek Apologists of the Second Century</i> (Philadelphia: Westminster Press, 1988), pp. 57–64; E.F. Osborn, <i class="calibre5">Justin Martyr</i> (Tübingen: Mohr, 1973).</p>
<p class="ntnl">Edwards argues that Justin’s understanding of the Logos is primarily founded upon the scriptural tradition and not upon Platonic thought. I believe Edwards is correct, but this does not seem to have mitigated his subordinationism nor his understanding that the Logos acts as an intermediary who bridges the gap between God and the world.</p>
<p class="ntull">22  L.W. Barnard states:</p>
<p class="bq1f">Our conclusion is that two conceptions of the Deity existed in Justin’s mind. On the one hand was his acceptance of the biblical and Christian idea of God as a living Creator, a compassionate Father who in Christ had drawn near to men and who was concerned with the welfare of each soul. On the other hand Justin retained the Middle Platonist emphasis on God as the unknowable and transcendent Cause far removed from the world and disconnected from it…. Justin had no real theory of divine immanence to complement his emphasis on divine transcendence … it was not given to him … to unite transcendence and immanence in a system at once rational and biblical. <i class="calibre5">Justin Martyr</i>, pp. 83–84.</p>
<p class="bql">E.R. Goodenough more positively comments upon this tension within Justin:</p>
<p class="bq1f">His very inconsistencies are those of the Hellenistic Jews who had long been trying to do what Justin was forced to attempt, to justify their faith by the help of philosophy. Like them Justin taught at one time that God was transcendent, unbegotten, impassive, perfect, self-contained, unmoved, unchanging, unnamed, the First Cause; at another time that he was the personal creator and sustainer of the universe; at another time he was the kind merciful Father who led errant individuals into faith and saved them by his grace, or the dread God of righteousness whose final judgement awaited all men. Such a many-sided God was the God of the Wisdom Literature of the Hellenistic Jewish philosophers, and such a God Hellenistic Jews would have brought with them into Christianity. <i class="calibre5">The Theology of Justin Martyr</i>, p. 138.</p>
<p class="ntull">23  <i class="calibre5">Apologia</i>, 1, 59.</p>
<p class="ntull">24  For a discussion of the scholarly opinions of whether or not Justin believed in the eternal pre-existence of matter, see Goodenough, <i class="calibre5">The Theology of Justin Martyr</i>, pp. 206–11; and May, <i class="calibre5">Creatio Ex Nihilo</i>, pp. 120–33. May writes:</p>
<p class="bq1f">The conception so emphatically declared by Justin of the unlimited creative power of God and the thought that God, as the sole unoriginate being stands over against the originate, the creation, are mutually supportive in their bearing and seem to urge the doctrine of <i class="calibre5">creatio ex nihilo</i>. But Justin did not take the last step towards its formulation; in that he was obviously hindered by the Platonist preconceptions of his thinking. In Justin’s philosophical theology two things can be observed: on the one hand that the dynamic of the Christian concept of God practically compelled acceptance of the doctrine of <i class="calibre5">creatio ex nihilo</i>, on the other hand how monstrously difficult it was for thought stamped with the philosophical tradition to take in the biblical idea of creation in its full implications (p. 132).</p>
<p class="ntull">25  <i class="calibre5">Apologia</i>, 2.</p>
<p class="ntull">26  <i class="calibre5">Apologia</i>, 1.</p>
<p class="ntull">27  See <i class="calibre5">Apologia</i>, 1.</p>
<p class="ntull">28  <i class="calibre5">Apologia</i>, 4.</p>
<p class="ntull">29  <i class="calibre5">Apologia</i>, 7.</p>
<p class="ntull">30  <i class="calibre5">Apologia</i>, 13.</p>
<p class="ntull">31  <i class="calibre5">Legatio pro Christianis</i>, 8.</p>
<p class="ntull">32  <i class="calibre5">Legatio pro Christianis</i>, 10. See also 16.</p>
<p class="ntull">33  <i class="calibre5">Legatio pro Christianis</i>, 22.</p>
<p class="ntull">34  <i class="calibre5">Legatio pro Christianis</i>, 29. See 13, 21 and 30.</p>
<p class="ntull">35  <i class="calibre5">Ad Autolycum</i>, I, 3 and 4.</p>
<p class="ntull">36  <i class="calibre5">Ad Autolycum</i>, II, 4.</p>
<p class="ntull">37  G. May argues that neither Aristides nor Athenagoras hold <i class="calibre5">creatio ex nihilo</i>, but rather that God is seen in the Platonic manner of the former of the world out of pre-existent matter (see <i class="calibre5">Creation Ex Nihilo</i>, pp. 118–20 and 137–39). However, he maintains that Theophilus of Antioch was the first to clearly formulate the full doctrine of <i class="calibre5">creatio ex nihilo</i>. The catalyst for this theological breakthrough, as May argues throughout his study, is the confronting of the philosophical issues raised by Gnosticism (see pp. 156–63).</p>
<p class="ntull">38  For brief accounts of and bibliography on the thought of Aristides, Athenagoras, and Theophilus, see Grant, <i class="calibre5">Greek Apologists of the Second Century</i>.</p>
<p class="ntull">39  D. Minns clearly points out the dilemma faced by the Gnostics. ‘On the one hand, God must be utterly transcendent, unchanging, incorporeal, invisible, beyond the grasp and description of created intellect, and so on. But, as God is also thought of as the provident, benign creator and ruler of all that is good, the question arises.’ How does one reconcile this dilemma? ‘The solution to this problem was to suggest that a subordinate god (or gods) effects the saving will of the first God for creation.’ <i class="calibre5">Irenaeus</i> (London: Geoffrey Chapman, 1994), p. 24. Minns also notes that because God is part of a continuous chain of being, he ultimately is responsible, as Irenaeus himself argued, for the evil that exists in the world. See pp. 30–31.</p>
<p class="ntull">40  For brief expositions of Gnosticism see: <i class="calibre5">Encyclopedia of Early Christianity</i>, ed. E. Ferguson (London: Garland Publishing, 1990); and <i class="calibre5">Encyclopedia of the Early Church</i>, ed. A. Di Berardino (Cambridge: James Clarke &amp; Co., 1992).</p>
<p class="ntull">41  <i class="calibre5">Adversus Haereses</i>, 2, 1, 1. G. May emphasizes that ‘the contribution made by Irenaeus and Theophilus must not be underestimated: they developed the doctrine of <i class="calibre5">creatio ex nihilo</i> with such convincing stringency that from the end of the second century it becomes with astonishing speed the self-evident premise of Christian talk of the creation. We have to see in Theophilus and Irenaeus the specific founders of the church doctrine of <i class="calibre5">creatio ex nihilo’. Creatio Ex Nihilo</i>, pp. 177–78.</p>
<p class="ntull">42  D. Minns writes: ‘Paradoxically, just because God’s transcendence over creation is absolute, he is immediately present to his creation in a way impossible within the Valentinian scheme.’ <i class="calibre5">Irenaeus</i>, p. 33.</p>
<p class="ntnl">R. Norris also writes: ‘What makes God <i class="calibre5">different</i> from every creature – his eternal and ingenerate simplicity – is thus, for Irenaeus, precisely what assures his direct and intimate <i class="calibre5">relation</i> with every creature. In this way Irenaeus reaches for a solution to the problem which Justin had encountered when he defined the transcendence of God in terms of the opposition between Being and Becoming.’ <i class="calibre5">God and World in Early Christian Theology</i> (London: Adam &amp; Charles Black, 1966), p. 70.</p>
<p class="ntnl">G. May also sees the doctrine of <i class="calibre5">creatio ex nihilo</i>, in contrast to Gnosticism, as arising out of the desire to ‘express and safeguard the omnipotence and freedom of God acting in history.’ <i class="calibre5">Creatio Ex Nihilo</i>, p. 180.</p>
<p class="ntull">43  See <i class="calibre5">Adversus Haereses</i>, 2, 2, 1; 2, 2, 4 and 5; 2, 9, 1; 2, 10, 2 and 4.</p>
<p class="ntull">44  <i class="calibre5">Adversus Haereses</i>, 4, 38, 3.</p>
<p class="ntull">45  <i class="calibre5">Adversus Haereses</i>, 3, 8, 3.</p>
<p class="ntull">46  <i class="calibre5">Adversus Haereses</i>, 2, 34, 2.</p>
<p class="ntull">47  <i class="calibre5">Adversus Haereses</i>, 2, 12, 1. See 2, 17, 3 and 8.</p>
<p class="ntull">48  <i class="calibre5">Adversus Haereses</i>, 2, 13, 3.</p>
<p class="ntull">49  <i class="calibre5">Adversus Haereses</i>, 2, 13, 4.</p>
<p class="ntull">50  <i class="calibre5">Adversus Haereses</i>, 2, 13, 9.</p>
<p class="ntull">51  For the emergence of negative descriptions of God within Hellenistic Judaism, Middle Platonism, Gnosticism, and Christianity, see J. Daniélou, <i class="calibre5">Gospel Message and Hellenistic Culture</i>, Vol. 2 (London: Darton, Longman &amp; Todd, 1973), pp. 323–43.</p>
<p class="ntull">52  D. Minns rightly notes that Irenaeus, unlike the Gnostics, is enamoured with the reality – the material earthiness – of creation. Irenaeus’ ‘religious awe of and love for the Creator God went hand in hand with a religious awe of and love for the world he believed that God to have created.’ <i class="calibre5">Irenaeus</i>, p. 25.</p>
<p class="ntull">53  <i class="calibre5">Adversus Haereses</i>, 4, 14, 2.</p>
<p class="ntull">54  <i class="calibre5">Adversus Haereses</i>, 3, preface.</p>
<p class="ntull">55  <i class="calibre5">Adversus Haereses</i>, 4, 14, 2.</p>
<p class="ntull">56  <i class="calibre5">Adversus Haereses</i>, 5, 32, 1.</p>
<p class="ntull">57  <i class="calibre5">Adversus Haereses</i>, 4, 38, 3.</p>
<p class="ntull">58  <i class="calibre5">Adversus Haereses</i>, 3, 25, 3.</p>
<p class="ntull">59  See <i class="calibre5">Adversus Haereses</i>, 4, 38, 2–3.</p>
<p class="ntull">60  Hallman, <i class="calibre5">The Descent of God</i>, p. 35.</p>
<p class="ntull">61  J. Hallman also wants God to be ‘total receptivity.’ Irenaeus would agree with this if what is meant is that God is completely cognizant of all that is happening within the created order – the joys and sufferings of humankind. However, Irenaeus would not accept that God is ‘total receptivity’ in the sense that he is changed by all that is taking place in the created realm, which is the primary meaning that Hallman wishes to give to this phrase.</p>
<p class="ntull">62  R. Norris states that ‘it is impossible not to recognize, in Irenaeus’ polemic against Gnosis, a conscious attempt to fuse the idea of God as incorruptible Being with the doctrine that God is unlimited creative Power, intimately present in the finite world without in any sense being a part of it’ (<i class="calibre5">God and World in Early Christian Theology</i>, p. 134–35).</p>
<p class="ntull">63  See <i class="calibre5">Protrepticus</i>, 5.</p>
<p class="ntull">64  See <i class="calibre5">Paedagogus</i>, 1, 8.</p>
<p class="ntull">65  <i class="calibre5">Protrepticus</i>, 6.</p>
<p class="ntull">66  <i class="calibre5">Stromata</i>, 5, 11.</p>
<p class="ntull">67  <i class="calibre5">Stromata</i>, 5, 12.</p>
<p class="ntull">68  <i class="calibre5">Paedagogus</i>, 1, 8.</p>
<p class="ntull">69  See <i class="calibre5">Stromata</i>, 2, 11; 4, 23; 6, 7; 7, 3; 7, 6; 7, 13. Clement carries over his understanding of impassibility into the Incarnation and the life of Christians. Due to the influence of Stoicism, Clement tends to see all passion and desire in a negative light. Jesus, therefore, was devoid of human passion, and the Christian life is one of growing into an impassible state. See <i class="calibre5">Stromata</i>, 6, 9; 5, 11; 7, 11.</p>
<p class="ntull">70  <i class="calibre5">Paedagogus</i>, 1, 8.</p>
<p class="ntull">71  <i class="calibre5">Stromata</i>, 2, 16.</p>
<p class="ntull">72  <i class="calibre5">Protrepticus</i>, 10. See <i class="calibre5">Paedagogus</i>, 1, 8 and 12.</p>
<p class="ntull">73  J. Hallman again misses the point when he states: ‘Coupled with the most extreme statement of God’s transcendence in early Christian theology, however, are other texts that show that in some way, even for Clement of Alexandria, God is passible.’ <i class="calibre5">The Descent of God</i>, p. 39. For Hallman, any statement that speaks of God’s love or compassion means that he is passible and changeable. This is not true. God can be, as he is for Clement, impassible in that he does not undergo changeable and negative emotional states, such as human beings undergo, but he can also be immutably passionate in that he is absolutely good and perfectly loving.</p>
<p class="ntull">74  <i class="calibre5">Stromata</i>, 5, 12.</p>
<p class="ntull">75  For more complete studies of Clement of Alexandria see: C. Brigg, <i class="calibre5">The Christian Platonists of Alexandria</i> (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1913); S.R.C. Lilla, <i class="calibre5">Clement of Alexandria: A Study in Christian Platonism and Gnosticism</i> (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1971); Osborn, <i class="calibre5">The Philosophy of Clement of Alexandria</i>.</p>
<p class="ntull">76  H. Crouzel notes that ‘while Clement always speaks of <i class="calibre5">apatheia</i> as an essential virtue of the spiritual man, occurrences of <i class="calibre5">apatheia</i> and <i class="calibre5">apathes</i> in Origen’s writings can be counted on the fingers of one hand and his teaching is nearer to <i class="calibre5">metriopatheia</i>, the restraint to be imposed on the passions, rather than <i class="calibre5">apatheia</i> itself.’ <i class="calibre5">Origen</i> (Edinburgh: T &amp; T Clark, 1989), p. 7.</p>
<p class="ntull">77  <i class="calibre5">De Principiis</i>, 1, 1, 7. The translation is taken from <i class="calibre5">Origen: On First Principles</i>, trans. G.W. Butterworth (Gloucester, MA: Peter Smith, 1973).</p>
<p class="ntull">78  See <i class="calibre5">De Principiis</i>, 1, 1, 6.</p>
<p class="ntull">79  <i class="calibre5">De Principiis</i>, 1, 1, 6.</p>
<p class="ntull">80  <i class="calibre5">Contra Celsum</i>, 6, 64. The translation is taken from <i class="calibre5">Origen: Contra Celsum</i>, trans. H. Chadwick, (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1953). See also <i class="calibre5">Comment in Joh</i>., 19, 6.</p>
<p class="ntull">81  <i class="calibre5">De Principiis</i>, 2, 4, 4.</p>
<p class="ntull">82  <i class="calibre5">Contra Celsum</i>, 4, 72. See also 6, 64.</p>
<p class="ntull">83  <i class="calibre5">Fragment on John</i>, 51. Translation taken from Hallman, <i class="calibre5">The Descent of God</i>, p. 43.</p>
<p class="ntull">84  <i class="calibre5">Contra Celsum</i>, 1, 21.</p>
<p class="ntull">85  <i class="calibre5">Contra Celsum</i>, 4, 14.</p>
<p class="ntull">86  <i class="calibre5">Contra Celsum</i>, 6, 62. See <i class="calibre5">De Principiis</i>, 2, 8, 5.</p>
<p class="ntull">87  <i class="calibre5">In Ezech. Hom</i>., 6, 6. Translation is from <i class="calibre5">The Early Christian Fathers</i>, H. Bettenson (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1956).</p>
<p class="ntull">88  <i class="calibre5">In Num. Hom</i>., 33, 2. Translation is from Bettenson. J. Hallman gives two further passages where Origen speaks both of God’s passibility and impassibility. One is from <i class="calibre5">Selecta in Ezekiel</i>, 16, 8. There Origen insists that ‘God is impassible, just as he is immutable and uncreated,’ and yet concludes that ‘God feels compassion for the one to be pitied; for God is not heartless.’ The other passage is from Origen’s <i class="calibre5">Homily on Exodus</i> where he discusses God’s jealousy. He states: ‘God does and suffers all things for us that we may be able to learn; he expresses notable and useful affections for us.’ 8, 5; see <i class="calibre5">The Descent of God</i>, pp. 41–42. See also J. Hallman, ‘Divine Suffering and Change in Origen and <i class="calibre5">Ad Theopompum,’ The Second Century</i> 7 (1989–90):92–94.</p>
<p class="ntull">89  Mozley, <i class="calibre5">The Impassibility of God</i>, p. 63.</p>
<p class="ntull">90  See Hallman, <i class="calibre5">The Descent of God</i>, p. 46. For other opinions, see p. 41. Hallman states the same in ‘Divine Suffering and Change in Origen,’ pp. 89–94. See also Grant, <i class="calibre5">The Early Christian Doctrine of God</i>, pp. 28–36.</p>
<p class="ntull">91  For further studies of Origen, see Brigg, <i class="calibre5">The Christian Platonists of Alexandria</i>; Crouzel, <i class="calibre5">Origen</i>; Daniélou, <i class="calibre5">Origen</i>; J.W. Trigg, <i class="calibre5">Origen: The Bible and Philosophy in the Third-century Church</i> (London: SCM, 1983).</p>
<p class="ntull">92  <i class="calibre5">Adversus Marcionem</i>, 1, 22.</p>
<p class="ntull">93  <i class="calibre5">Adversus Marcionem</i>, 1, 23.</p>
<p class="ntull">94  <i class="calibre5">Adversus Marcionem</i>, 1, 24.</p>
<p class="ntull">95  See <i class="calibre5">Adversus Marcionem</i>, 1, 25.</p>
<p class="ntull">96  <i class="calibre5">Adversus Marcionem</i>, 2, 11.</p>
<p class="ntull">97  <i class="calibre5">Adversus Marcionem</i>, 2, 13.</p>
<p class="ntull">98  All of the above quotations are from <i class="calibre5">Adversus Marcionem</i>, 2, 16.</p>
<p class="ntull">99  <i class="calibre5">Adversus Hermogenem</i>, 12.</p>
<p class="ntsll">100  <i class="calibre5">Adversus Marcionem</i>, 1, 3.</p>
<p class="ntsll">101  <i class="calibre5">Adversus Marcionem</i>, 1, 8.</p>
<p class="ntsll">102  J. Hallman is correct when he states that Tertullian, in speaking of God’s ‘emotion’ was attempting to be ‘more biblical.’ However, he again misses the true logic of Tertullian’s concerns and simply concludes that he was inconsistent, and he was inconsistent because his Greek philosophical presuppositions would not allow him to be thoroughly biblical. See <i class="calibre5">The Descent of God</i>, p. 62; and also his ‘The Mutability of God: Tertullian to Lactantius,’ <i class="calibre5">Theological Studies</i> 42 (1981):385. R. Norris makes a similar judgment. See <i class="calibre5">God and World in Early Christian Theology</i>, p. 112. See also Wilken, <i class="calibre5">Remembering the Christian Past</i>, p. 77.</p>
<p class="ntnl">While it is somewhat of a digression from our present concerns, it must be noted, for Tertullian’s sake, that Hallman, both in his book (pp. 62–66) and in his article (pp. 382–86), argues that Tertullian is equally inconsistent in his understanding of the Incarnation.</p>
<p class="ntnl">In his work, <i class="calibre5">De Carne Christi</i>, Tertullian places these words in the mouth of Marcion: ‘But the reason why I deny that God really and truly changed into man, in the sense of being both born and corporated in flesh, is that he who is without end must of necessity also be unchangeable: for to be changed into something else is an ending of what originally was: therefore change is inapplicable to one to whom ending is inapplicable.’ In response to this argument Tertullian admits that such is the case on the finite level – things that change into something else cease to be what they were. However, ‘nothing is on equal terms with God: his nature is far removed from the circumstances of all things whatsoever.’ If God would change into something in the same manner as creatures, then there would be no difference between God and all else. But ‘the contrary obtains, namely that God can be changed into anything whatsoever, and yet continue such as he is.’ If the angels who appeared to Abraham remained who they were and yet ‘changed into human shape, and that the bodies they were clothed with were of such verity that Abraham washed their feet, … will you deny this to the more mighty God, as though his Christ had not the power, when truly clothed with manhood, of continuing to be God?’ All the quotations are from <i class="calibre5">De Carne Christi</i>, 3 taken from E. Evans’ translation <i class="calibre5">Tertullian’s Treatise on the Incarnation</i> (London: SPCK, 1956). Hallman believes that Tertullian is here espousing a mutable understanding of God. While God can remain who he is, he can nonetheless ‘change into’ something else and so, within the Incarnation, become man. This then allows, Hallman believes, Tertullian rightly to predicate human passions and suffering to the Son not just in so far as he is man, but also in so far as he is God. For Hallman this is the right and proper understanding of the communication of idioms.</p>
<p class="ntnl">While it was infelicitous for Tertullian to continue to use the Marcionite language that God, within the Incarnation, ‘changed into man’ (<i class="calibre5">deum in hominem vere conversum</i>), yet the point that Tertullian wished to make is precisely the opposite of that proposed by Hallman. First, Tertullian obviously did not hold that in the Incarnation God actually ‘changed into man’ in that sense that he ceased being God and was transformed into a man similar to a caterpillar changing into a butterfly. The whole point of Tertullian’s stress that he ‘continues as he is’ is to assure that it is really and truly God who is man. Second, it must remembered that Tertullian was arguing against the Marcionite Docetism. Thus, his primary concern is to uphold the reality of the Son’s humanity. We see this in his use of the example of the angels appearing to Abraham – their flesh was so real that Abraham could wash their feet. For Tertullian the Son was truly ‘clothed with manhood.’ Third, in the light of this anti-docetic concern, Tertullian was not then saying that somehow God, while maintaining his identity, ‘changed into man’ in the sense of being mutable, but that God could actually become man without changing. This is why Tertullian insists that ‘change into,’ when applied to the Incarnation, assumes a radically different meaning than when applied to creatures. When applied to creatures it denotes mutability, but when applied to the Incarnation – God becoming man – it does not. This is precisely why God remains as he is even though he has become man. For Tertullian the ‘changing into’ is not predicated of God as if he changed in becoming man, but rather ‘changing into’ refers to the new mode of existence he has assumed, that is, to the fact that Son was ‘truly clothed with manhood.’ The ‘changing into’ is Tertullian’s way of emphasizing the actual reality of the Son’s manhood and not a designation of divine mutability. It is fascinating that the words Tertullian attributes to Marcion when defining what ‘change into’ means are these: ‘God was really and truly changed into man, <i class="calibre5">in the sense of being both born and corporated in flesh</i>’ (<i class="calibre5">ita ut et nasceretur et carne corporaretur</i>). I believe Tertullian here has written his own gloss into his adversary’s words. For Marcion ‘change into’ meant ceasing to be one thing and coming to be another, but for Tertullian ‘change into,’ when applied to the Incarnation, denoted not change but simply the ability to take on flesh, and thus actually being born. Again it is the true reality of Jesus’ humanity that most concerned Tertullian. Moreover, Hallman misrepresents Tertullian’s understanding of the communication of idioms. Divine and human attributes are predicated of the same Son, but ‘that these two sets of attributes, the divine and the human, are each kept distinct from the other, is of course accounted for by the equal verity of each nature’ (<i class="calibre5">De Carne Christi</i>, 5). For Tertullian, it is truly the Son who suffers, but he truly suffers, not as God, but as man.</p>
<p class="ntnl">Because Tertullian advocated, according to Hallman, a mutable and passible God in <i class="calibre5">De Carne Christi</i>, Hallman holds that in his later work, <i class="calibre5">Adversus Praxean</i>, he reneged on this position and so becomes inconsistent. Here Tertullian asks: ‘How did the Word become flesh, – whether it was by having been transfigured (<i class="calibre5">transfiguratio</i>), as it were in the flesh, or by having really clothed himself in flesh? Certainly it was by a real clothing of himself in flesh. For the rest, we must needs believe God to be unchangeable and incapable of form, as being eternal. But transfiguration is the destruction of that which previously existed’ (<i class="calibre5">Adversus Praxean</i>, 27). This can now be interpreted in a manner that is totally consistent with, and obviously clarifies, Tertullian’s earlier position. In the Incarnation the Son is not ‘changed into’ flesh, in the sense of being transfigured into flesh for God cannot cease to be who he is and, moreover, if he was so transfigured, it would no longer be God who is man. All that would now exist would be the present reality of ‘his’ transfigured state – the man Jesus – just as only the butterfly exists after the metamorphosis. Tertullian may have been struggling with finding the proper concepts and language, but inconsistent and illogical he was not.</p>
<p class="ntsll">103  <i class="calibre5">De Trinitate</i>, 1. See also 3.</p>
<p class="ntsll">104  See <i class="calibre5">De Trinitate</i>, 2.</p>
<p class="ntsll">105  <i class="calibre5">De Trinitate</i>, 4.</p>
<p class="ntsll">106  <i class="calibre5">De Trinitate</i>, 4.</p>
<p class="ntsll">107  <i class="calibre5">De Trinitate</i>, 5.</p>
<p class="ntsll">108  See <i class="calibre5">De Trinitate</i>, 6.</p>
<p class="ntsll">109  See <i class="calibre5">De Trinitate</i>, 7.</p>
<p class="ntsll">110  See <i class="calibre5">De Ira Dei</i>, 1 and 2.</p>
<p class="ntsll">111  <i class="calibre5">De Ira Dei</i>, 4. See also 17.</p>
<p class="ntsll">112  <i class="calibre5">De Ira Dei</i>, 5. See also 6 and especially 16. Lactantius distinguishes between just and unjust anger. God only exercises just anger against what is wicked for the benefit of the good. See <i class="calibre5">De Ira Dei</i>, 17.</p>
<p class="ntsll">113  See <i class="calibre5">De Ira Dei</i>, 11 and 12.</p>
<p class="ntsll">114  See <i class="calibre5">De Ira Dei</i>, 23.</p>
<p class="ntsll">115  See <i class="calibre5">De Ira Dei</i>, 15 and 16.</p>
<p class="ntsll">116  See <i class="calibre5">De Ira Dei</i>, 21.</p>
<p class="ntsll">117  <i class="calibre5">De Ira Dei</i>, 22.</p>
<p class="ntsll">118  <i class="calibre5">De Ira Dei</i>, 11.</p>
<p class="ntsll">119  <i class="calibre5">Divinae Institutiones</i>, 1, 3.</p>
<p class="ntsll">120  <i class="calibre5">Divinae Institutiones</i>, 1, 3.</p>
<p class="ntsll">121  <i class="calibre5">Divinae Institutiones</i>, 2, 9.</p>
<p class="ntsll">122  G.L. Prestige significantly comments:</p>
<p class="bqul">In point of fact, though the Fathers in speaking of the ineffable being of God tended to use abstract forms which are outwardly expressive of a negative meaning, nevertheless their minds were far from being bounded by merely negative conceptions. The negative forms are enriched with an infinite wealth of positive association.</p>
<p class="bqulf">This may be realised when it is seen that the negative prefixes so widely employed in words intended to describe the divine nature really testify to divine freedom and independence. When it is asserted that God is free from various limitations and controls, the effect is to assert his entire freedom to be himself and to act according to his own nature and will. His absolute independence is a corollary to his absolute goodness and wisdom, as well as to his absolute capacity to create. <i class="calibre5">God in Patristic Thought</i> (London: SPCK, 1952), p. 4.</p>
<p class="ntsll">123  G.L. Prestige’s comments are again appropriate:</p>
<p class="bq1f">It is clear that impassibility means not that God is inactive or uninterested, not that he surveys existence with Epicurean impassibility from the shelter of a metaphysical isolation, but that his will is determined from within instead of being swayed from without. It safeguards the truth that the impulse alike in providential order and in redemption and sanctification come from the will of God. <i class="calibre5">God in Patristic Thought</i>, p. 7.</p>
<p class="ntnl">Or again:</p>
<p class="bq1f">As has been stated already, there is no sign that divine impassibility was taught with any view of minimising the interest of God in his creation or his care and concern for the world that he made. In fact, any such theory is manifestly absurd. Impassibility, though affording an obvious line of approach to the wider doctrine, is a department of the larger question of self-consistency. God is, in the fullest sense, the same yesterday, today, and for ever. <i class="calibre5">God in Patristic Thought</i>, p. 11.</p>
<p class="ntnl">Even someone as critical as J.K. Mozley could write: ‘To suppose that Christian thinkers carelessly passed over all that seems to us involved in our belief in God’s loving care, his fatherly providence, and his moral purposefulness, would be the greatest injustice both to their words and their thought.’ <i class="calibre5">The Impassibility of God</i>, p. 46.</p>
<p class="ntsll">124  Similar to Prestige, F.S. van Beeck holds that the patristic notion of <i class="calibre5">apatheia</i> ensures the freedom of God. He writes that ‘<i class="calibre5">apatheia</i> safeguards God’s transcendent freedom to be God-in-self-manifestation – that is, to communicate the divine Self to the world in wholly self-initiated love, irrespective of human or cosmic readiness or response.’ He also notes that within the patristic monastic spiritual tradition the human virtue of <i class="calibre5">apatheia</i> is not seen in any Stoic ideal of impassiveness, ‘but as the patient pursuit of love, just as the attribution of <i class="calibre5">apatheia</i> to God had served to affirm the divine mercy and love.’ ‘This Weakness of God’s is Stronger.’ 20 and 22.</p>
</body>
</html>
