<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en-US">
  <head>
    <title>Does God Suffer?</title>
    <link href="../styles/page-template.xpgt" rel="stylesheet" type="application/vnd.adobe-page-template+xml"/>
    <meta content="urn:uuid:e0000000-0000-0000-0000-000004626051" name="Adept.expected.resource"/>
    <meta http-equiv="Content-Type" content="text/html; charset=utf-8"/>
  <link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="../../stylesheet.css"/>
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="../../page_styles.css"/>
</head>
  <body class="calibre">
<p class="cta"><a id="page_113" class="calibre2"></a><a href="06_Contents.xhtml#ch6" id="ch6" class="calibre2">6</a></p>
<p class="cs"><a href="06_Contents.xhtml#ch6" class="calibre2">The Trinity’s Loving Act of Creation</a></p>
<p class="pn">Thus far I have argued that God has revealed himself, as witnessed in the biblical account, to be completely other than the created realm, and yet capable of relating to and acting within it without losing his total otherness in so doing. The acts which reveal God to be the Savior and Creator, and so related to the created order as the One All Holy God, are the very same acts that reveal him to be, as the Savior and Creator, wholly other than the created realm. Indeed, God could not be the Savior, Creator and Sanctifier that he is unless he were the Wholly Other. The immanent activity of God in the created order, and his intimate relationship with human beings are predicated upon his absolute transcendent otherness. The philosophical question of God’s impassibility or passibility must be answered from within this biblical doctrine of God, and as I argued, the biblical evidence, while not addressing the philosophical issues, strongly points to God being impassible.</p>
<p class="in">I have also argued that Philo and the early Apologists attempted, each individual with greater or lesser success, to uphold the biblical account of both God’s transcendence and his immanence. For the early Fathers the act of creation which manifests and establishes the complete otherness of God, and thus his eternal, all-powerful and unchanging nature, is the very same act which relates him to the created order and so founds his loving and salvific relation to it. Moreover for the Fathers, the attributes which define God as completely other – eternal, all-powerful, incorruptible, infinite, immutable, impassible, etc. – are equally the very same attributes assuring that he is the living, dynamic, all good, loving, kind, merciful and compassionate God.</p>
<p class="in">We have now reached the stage in our study when we must establish more fully and systematically the theological and philosophical basis of God’s all-powerful, eternal, incorruptible, immutable and impassible nature. It is one thing to say, as the Fathers did, that because God is Creator he must be all-powerful. It is quite another to found this attribute philosophically, that is, to conceive the precise nature of his power which allows him to create. One can also hold that, because God is other than the created order, and thus eternal and therefore outside time, he must be immutable and impassible. Yet, one must demonstrate the theological and philosophical justification for this. Above all it is necessary to give a theological and philosophical account of God which justifies his absolute <a id="page_114" class="calibre3"></a>otherness, and, equally and simultaneously, his intimate loving relationship to the world and human beings. In this chapter I wish to offer such an account.</p>
<p class="in">Here I want to present my theological and philosophical understanding of God and of his relationship to the created and human order, especially as it concerns his impassible nature and, equally, his ability to love and care for human beings. While this chapter is the heart of this study, it will not address the key issue of whether or not God, in his compassion and love, suffers in himself on behalf of and with humankind, nor will I address the christological issue concerning the manner of the Son’s suffering as man. These issues will be examined in the following two chapters, and this chapter will simply, but necessarily, lay the crucial foundation for such a discussion. All the proper philosophical and theological pieces must first be precisely placed before such a discussion can be undertaken, and this is the objective of this chapter.</p>
<p class="in">In order to approach these concerns properly I wish to treat them both by way of Christian revelation and by way of philosophical enquiry. While some of the arguments presented in this chapter will be founded upon philosophical reasoning alone, apart from Christian revelation, other arguments will be primarily founded upon Christian doctrine and interpreted and elucidated through philosophical reasoning. Such an approach will not only help establish the primacy of biblical revelation and Christian doctrine, but also help to thwart the frequent criticism that the God of traditional Christian philosophy differs from, and often is in conflict with, the God of Christian revelation. I wish to found my arguments on the inter-relationship between doctrine and philosophy, and so demonstrate that the interplay between them helps to reinforce and clarify both, thus providing answers that are theologically orthodox and philosophically sound.<sup class="calibre6">1</sup></p>
<p class="in">Because this chapter is composed of many inter-related components, it is rather lengthy. However, the argument of the chapter, as a whole, is one. This must be kept in mind as each component is examined and interconnected with the others. Hopefully, at the end, the inner logic of the whole argument will then be clearly discerned and easily grasped.</p>
<p class="sec"><b class="calibre8">The Persons of the Trinity: Subsistent Relations</b></p>
<p class="pn">I wish to begin then by examining the nature of the Trinity. This may appear an improbable place to begin since the question of God’s immutability and impassibility is normally read under the philosophical rubric concerning the nature of the one God and his attributes. This, as we saw, was the primary context within which the Fathers argued, and it was equally the context from which Aquinas approached the issue. However, by opening our enquiry with an examination of the Trinity we not only locate it within the environment of Christian doctrine, but also <a id="page_115" class="calibre3"></a>within the foundational mystery of the Christian faith. It would seem appropriate that the Trinity itself should bear primary witness to the attributes of either immutability and impassibility or mutability and passibility.</p>
<p class="in">This study is not the place to recount the development of the doctrine of the Trinity as it arose out of scripture and found expression in the early church.<sup class="calibre6">2</sup> I take as my starting point the Christian trinitarian tradition, founded upon the councils of Nicea and Constantinople I, which professed that the Son and the Holy Spirit are <i class="calibre5">homoousioi</i> (one in being) with the Father, and thus that the one God is a trinity of co-equal persons or subjects. Equally, following the tradition initiated by Gregory of Nazianzus and developed by Augustine and Aquinas, I hold that what distinguishes the persons of the Trinity is their relationships, that is, that they subsist as distinct subjects or are defined as distinct persons only in relationship to one another.<sup class="calibre6">3</sup> I first wish to examine more fully the significance and implications of the persons of the Trinity being subsistent relations.</p>
<p class="in">Human persons are partially defined by their relationships and so cannot be fully understood apart from their relationships. A father is a father only because he begets a child and so is related to his child as father. A woman is a wife only because she has a husband. Children are sons or daughters only because they are related to their parents who begot them. However, human persons are not entirely constituted by their relationships. Relationships can cease (a parent, a child, or a spouse can die), and yet the person continues to live.<sup class="calibre6">4</sup> A human person can also make new relationships (one can marry or make a new friend). Human persons then possess relational potential which can be actualized, and in so doing they are defined as who they are. While human persons cannot <a id="page_116" class="calibre3"></a>exist without relationships, yet they are always more than the sum total of their relationships.<sup class="calibre6">5</sup></p>
<p class="in">For human beings not to be completely constituted by their relationships may first appear to be a good thing. Human persons possess an independent integrity apart from their relationships. However, it is precisely this independent integrity which does not allow a human person to be given completely to another, but he or she must do so only through mediating words (words of kindness and love) and actions (hugs, kisses, sexual relations, etc.) which express only a partial giving of oneself even if one’s intention is to give the whole of oneself.<sup class="calibre6">6</sup> This is not the case within the Trinity.</p>
<p class="in">The persons of the Trinity are eternally constituted in their own singular identity only in relation to one another, and thus they subsist as who they are only within their mutual relationships. In their relationships to one another each person of the Trinity subsistently defines, and is equally subsistently defined by, the other persons. Thus the persons of the Trinity are subsistent relations. These mutual subsistent relationships, which constitute and define the identity of the persons of the Trinity, are founded upon origin and action.<sup class="calibre6">7</sup></p>
<p class="in">The Father subsists eternally as Father only in relation to the Son and to the Holy Spirit, for his very identity as Father is predicated upon his being the origin of the Son and of the Holy Spirit, and so he is constituted as Father in the one eternal act of begetting the Son and spirating the Holy Spirit.<sup class="calibre6">8</sup> The Father then only subsists as Father in and by giving <a id="page_117" class="calibre3"></a>himself wholly as Father in the begetting of his Son. He gives himself wholly in the begetting of the Son through the Holy Spirit. The Father then equally and simultaneously gives himself wholly in spirating the Holy Spirit for the Holy Spirit proceeds from the Father as the fulness of his fatherly love in and by whom the Father begets the Son.<sup class="calibre6">9</sup> Thus, the Son and the Holy Spirit are fully divine only because the Father has given himself wholly as Father, and the Father is Father only because his whole identity is founded upon the action of his complete giving of himself. The Father only subsists as Father in relation to the Son and the Holy Spirit.</p>
<p class="in">The Son subsists eternally as Son only in relation to the Father and to the Holy Spirit, for his very identity is predicated upon his being begotten of the Father from whom he takes his origin and upon his being conformed by the Holy Spirit, in whom he is begotten, to be the Son of and for the Father. As the Son, he in turn gives himself completely to the Father as Son in the same Spirit who conformed him to be Son of and for the Father. Thus, the Holy Spirit proceeds from the Son as the act of the Son’s total giving himself in love for the Father who begot him in the same Holy Spirit of love. Therefore, the Son is Son only because he is begotten by the Father in the Holy Spirit and in the reciprocal giving of himself completely to the Father in the same Spirit in whom he was begotten. There is nothing which constitutes the Son as Son other than his being begotten of the Father in the Spirit and in the act of giving himself as Son to the Father in the same Spirit, and thus he subsists as Son only in relationship to them.</p>
<p class="in">The Holy Spirit subsists eternally as the Holy Spirit only in relation to the Father and to the Son, for his identity as the Holy Spirit is predicated upon his coming forth from the Father as the one in whom the Father begets the Son and as the one in whom the Son, having been begotten in the Spirit, in turn completely gives himself, in the Spirit, to the Father as Son. Thus, while the Spirit comes forth from the Father as the Father’s love in whom the Son is begotten and proceeds from the Son as the Son’s love of the Father, the Holy Spirit equally only subsists, as the Holy Spirit, in the act of conforming the Father to be Father of and for the Son, and in the simultaneous act of conforming the Son to be Son of and for <a id="page_118" class="calibre3"></a>the Father. There is nothing which constitutes the Holy Spirit as Holy Spirit other than his proceeding from the Father and the Son and so conforming the Father to be Father of and for the Son and the Son to be the Son of and for the Father, and thus he subsists as the Holy Spirit only in relation to them.<sup class="calibre6">10</sup></p>
<p class="in">A number of important conclusions must now be drawn. First, because the persons of the Trinity only subsist as distinct subjects in relationship to one another, they are fully, completely, and absolutely relational. Each distinct person is defined as who he singularly is, and so subsists as who he is, only in relation to the other two. The Father, the Son and the Holy Spirit solely and completely are who they are only in relation to one another.</p>
<p class="in">Second, because the persons of the Trinity subsist only in relation to one another, they are relations in act and only relations in act. As designating subsistent relations or relations fully in act, the terms ‘Father,’ ‘Son,’ and ‘Holy Spirit’ are therefore <i class="calibre5">verbs</i>, for they refer to, define, and name, solely and exclusively, the <i class="calibre5">interrelated acts</i> by which all three persons are who they are.<sup class="calibre6">11</sup> The Father is not ‘someone’ who possesses fatherhood. The term ‘Father’ designates that the Father is completely and solely ‘fatherhood in act’ and nothing more. The Son is sonship itself for he is begotten by the Father in the Spirit and so gives himself in the same Spirit to the Father as Son. The Holy Spirit has no specific name because the Holy Spirit is solely defined as the one who proceeds from the Father and the Son and in so doing is the act which conforms the Father to be Father of and for the Son and the Son to be Son of and for the Father.<sup class="calibre6">12</sup> Put succinctly and boldly, the persons of the Trinity are not <a id="page_119" class="calibre3"></a>nouns; they are verbs and the names which designate them – Father, Son and Holy Spirit – designate the acts by which they are defined.</p>
<p class="in">By stating that the persons of the Trinity are verbs and not nouns does not mean that they are not acting subjects or persons, as if one needs a noun (a subject or person) in order to perform an action. Because the acts (the verbs) that completely define and constitute the Father, the Son and the Holy Spirit are personal or subjective acts (and not impersonal acts), the very acts themselves constitute the subjectivity or personhood of the Father, the Son and the Holy Spirit. Within the Trinity the action (the verb) constitutes the subject and the subject is a verb – the action by which he is so constituted.</p>
<p class="sec"><b class="calibre8">The Trinity: Immutable and Impassible</b></p>
<p class="pn">The conclusion to which all of this leads is that the Father, the Son and the Holy Spirit, as subsistent relations fully in act, are immutable and impassible. They are immutable not because they are static or inert in their relationships, but precisely for the opposite reason. Because they are subsistent relations fully in act, because the terms ‘Father,’ ‘Son,’ and ‘Holy Spirit’ designate pure acts (and thus are pure verbs and nothing other than verbs), they do not have any relational potential which would need to be actualized in order to make them more relational – more who they are. As subsistent relations fully in act, the persons of the Trinity are utterly and completely dynamic and active in their integral and comprehensive self-giving to one another, and could not possibly become any more dynamic or active in their self-giving since they are constituted, and so subsist, as who they are only in their complete and utter self-giving to one another.</p>
<p class="in">Moreover, they are impassible not because they lack passion, in the sense of being fully loving and completely self-giving, but again precisely for the opposite reason. As subsistent relations fully in act, the persons of the Trinity are completely and utterly passionate in their self-giving to one another and cannot become more passionate for they are <a id="page_120" class="calibre3"></a>constituted, and so subsist, as who they are only because they have absolutely given themselves completely to one another in love.<sup class="calibre6">13</sup></p>
<p class="in">Thus we see that the Trinity itself demands that the divine persons be immutable and impassible, and it does so for unconditionally positive reasons. If the divine persons were not immutable and impassible, they would not be subsistent relations fully in act, and so their absolute dynamic intimacy as distinctly related subjects would be shattered.<sup class="calibre6">14</sup></p>
<p class="sec"><b class="calibre8">God as <i class="calibre12">Actus Purus</i></b></p>
<p class="pn">Having just argued that the Christian doctrine of the Trinity demands that the divine persons be immutably and impassibly who they are, not in a stagnant or inert manner, but in a way that is supremely dynamic and supremely relational, I now want to put forth the purely philosophical reasons for why God is immutable and impassible. Because these arguments are solely philosophical in nature, and thus according to reason, and not founded upon revelation, they will concern the one God rather than the Trinity since reason alone cannot establish that God is a trinity of persons. However, as we will see, what is established through revelation and doctrine is reinforced and in accord with what can be grasped by reason, and vice-versa.</p>
<p class="in">The Christian biblical and patristic tradition holds that God is almighty, all-powerful, all-perfect, eternal, immutable, and impassible. But what is it about the very nature of God which demands that he possess these and similar attributes? Here I would argue, in accordance with Aquinas, that God’s nature is ‘<i class="calibre5">to be</i>’, that he is <i class="calibre5">ipsum esse</i> (to-be itself) and thus, <i class="calibre5">actus purus</i> (pure act)<sup class="calibre6">15</sup> In order to understand what it means for God to be ‘to-be itself’ it is first necessary to discern the meaning of <i class="calibre5">esse</i> (to be) with regards to finite beings.<sup class="calibre6">16</sup></p>
<p class="in">In finite beings Aquinas makes a distinction between what something <a id="page_121" class="calibre3"></a>is, its essence or quiddity, and that something is. ‘I can know, for instance, what a man or a phoenix is and still be ignorant whether it has being or reality. From this it is clear that being is other than essence or quiddity, unless perhaps there is a reality whose quiddity is its being.’<sup class="calibre6">17</sup> Thus, for Aquinas, <i class="calibre5">esse</i> is that act by which something actually does exist. <i class="calibre5">Esse</i> (to be) is a verb and as such does not possess any quiddity, but purely specifies the act by which something exists and so is the foundation of all subsequent actions performed by the existing being.<sup class="calibre6">18</sup> While <i class="calibre5">esse</i> (to be) and <i class="calibre5">essentia</i> (quiddity) are distinct in that <i class="calibre5">esse</i> possesses no quiddity and <i class="calibre5">essentia</i> possesses no <i class="calibre5">esse</i>, yet they are not realities in themselves.<sup class="calibre6">19</sup> Rather, only beings actually exist and so <i class="calibre5">esse</i> and <i class="calibre5">essentia</i> are related to one another, for Aquinas, in an act-potency relationship. <i class="calibre5">Esse</i> makes <i class="calibre5">to be</i> what potentially is and potentially <i class="calibre5">what is</i> only <i class="calibre5">is</i> because of <i class="calibre5">esse</i>.<sup class="calibre6">20</sup></p>
<p class="in">Because <i class="calibre5">esse</i> and <i class="calibre5">essentia</i> are distinct within finite reality, no finite being, whether it be a man, dog, or star, is of such a nature that its nature demands that it be. Therefore, Aquinas argues that the <i class="calibre5">esse</i> of finite creatures must come from an extrinsic cause.<sup class="calibre6">21</sup> ‘There must be a reality that is the cause of being for all things, because it is pure being <a id="page_122" class="calibre3"></a>(<i class="calibre5">esse tantum</i>). If this were not so, one would go on to infinity in causes, for everything that is not pure being has a cause of its being.’ This being who is pure <i class="calibre5">esse</i> is ‘the first cause or God.’<sup class="calibre6">22</sup> Aquinas’ understanding of God as pure <i class="calibre5">esse</i> is founded upon what <i class="calibre5">esse</i> is in creatures. God must be pure <i class="calibre5">esse</i> for this is what finite beings lack, and what they must be given if they are to be. If God were not pure <i class="calibre5">esse</i>, he would be in the same situation as creatures and so be in need of <i class="calibre5">esse</i> himself. While finite beings are composite beings in which their essence and <i class="calibre5">esse</i> are in an act-potency relationship, God, whose very nature is to be, <i class="calibre5">ipsum esse</i>, is not composite, and ‘therefore his essence is his existence,’ that is, his very nature or quiddity is ‘<i class="calibre5">to-be</i>’ and nothing more.<sup class="calibre6">23</sup></p>
<p class="in">What must be grasped and remembered, something which Aquinas’ critics never seem to do, is that <i class="calibre5">esse</i> is an act, that <i class="calibre5">esse</i> is a verb. As <i class="calibre5">ipsum esse</i> God’s very nature, as with the persons of the Trinity, is not then designated or signified by a noun, but by a verb.<sup class="calibre6">24</sup> Being pure act (pure verb) as <i class="calibre5">ipsum esse</i> does not mean that God is <i class="calibre5">something</i> fully in act, such as a creature might actualize its full potential, but rather that God is act pure and simple. Because God is <i class="calibre5">ipsum esse</i> he has no self-constituting potency which needs to be actualized in order for him to be more fully who he is, not because he is <i class="calibre5">something</i> fully in act, but again, because he is act pure and simple. God is <i class="calibre5">actus purus</i>.<sup class="calibre6">25</sup></p>
<p class="sec"><a id="page_123" class="calibre2"></a><b class="calibre8">God: Immutable and Impassible</b></p>
<p class="pn">Because God is <i class="calibre5">actus purus</i> it is evident why God is all-perfect, and thus immutable. If ‘<i class="calibre5">esse</i> is the actuality of all acts, and on account of this is the perfection of all perfections,’ then God as <i class="calibre5">actus purus</i> ‘must needs be most actual, and therefore most perfect; for a thing is perfect in proportion to its state of actuality, because we call that perfect which lacks nothing of the mode of its perfection.<sup class="calibre6">26</sup> God is then perfect not because he has perfected all his potential, but, being <i class="calibre5">ipsum esse</i>, he is perfection itself.</p>
<p class="in">This is why God is immutable. Because God is pure act it is impossible for him to acquire more perfection through some change which would make him more actual. ‘Everything which is in any way changed, is in some way potentiality. Hence it is evident that it is impossible for God to be in any way changeable.’ Being pure act God possesses ‘all the plenitude of perfection of all being. He cannot acquire anything new’ through change, that is, by actualizing some potential.<sup class="calibre6">27</sup> While the attribute of immutability is a negative attribute, it is founded on something that is entirely positive – God being pure act or being itself. God is immutable not because he is static, inert, or inactive, but precisely because he, as pure act, is supremely active and dynamic and cannot ontologically become more in act. As M. Dodds states:</p>
<p class="bq1">The true significance of the attribute of divine immutability in the theology of St. Thomas consists, not in the fact that it indicates the invariable self-identity of God, but in the fact that it indicates the dynamic and boundless perfection of God as <i class="calibre5">ipsum esse subsistens</i>…. Far from implying, therefore, that God may be somehow static or inert, the attribute of immutability directly signifies that God, as pure <i class="calibre5">esse</i>, is pure dynamic actuality.<sup class="calibre6">28</sup></p>
<p class="pn">God then is supremely immutable because he is supremely in act.</p>
<p class="in">The problem is that all critics of Aquinas and the Christian tradition consistently interpret divine immutability in a positive manner, as if to say that God is immutable is to conceive him as static and inert. As was noted earlier, Barth gives one of the most striking accounts of this understanding when he states that if God were absolutely immutable, he would be utterly immobile and lifeless, and thus God would be death.<sup class="calibre6">29</sup></p>
<p class="in">Dodds, in what is by far the best comprehensive study on Aquinas’ understanding of divine immutability, comments on this misinterpretation by noting that ‘it is quite possible for us to assume that when immutability is predicated of God, it is that creaturely sort of <a id="page_124" class="calibre3"></a>immutability, whose image is present in our imagination, which is intended. The result of such an assumption is, as we have seen, usually a monstrous image of the unchanging God’.<sup class="calibre6">30</sup></p>
<p class="in">G. Grisez argues that because one holds that God is immutable, it does not follow that he is ‘standing still, fixed, inert, or rigid.’ Moreover, to say that God ‘is not affected by man’s suffering and stops with this negation, one strongly suggests that he is cold and unconcerned about evil. One must negate of God <i class="calibre5">everything</i> descriptive of entities given in experience.’<sup class="calibre6">31</sup></p>
<p class="in">I state in <i class="calibre5">Does God Change?</i>:</p>
<p class="bq1">One should not be misled into thinking that God’s immutability is like the immutability of a rock only more so. What God and rocks appear to have in common is only the fact that they do not change. The reason for their unchangeableness is for polar-opposite reasons….God is unchangeable not because he is inert or static like a rock, but for just the opposite reason. He is so dynamic, so active that no change can make him more active. He is act pure and simple.<sup class="calibre6">32</sup></p>
<p class="in">This should be kept in mind when one considers process theology or any other theology that predicates change in God in order to make him more dynamic. In making God mutable, process theology’s notion of God has more in common with rocks than does Aquinas’ notion of God.</p>
<p class="in">What the critics consistently fail to grasp is that God’s immutability is not opposed to his vitality. Nor need one hold together in some dialectical fashion his immutability and his vibrancy, as if in spite of being immutable he is nonetheless dynamic. Rather, it is precisely God’s immutability as <i class="calibre5">actus purus</i> that guarantees and authenticates his pure vitality and absolute dynamism. Thus, when the critics assert that because Aquinas and the tradition believe God to be immutable they espouse a static and inert conception of God, they but demonstrate their own lack of understanding.<sup class="calibre6">33</sup></p>
<p class="in">Aquinas did not treat impassibility when considering the various attributes of God within his two <i class="calibre5">Summae</i>. It arises primarily in the context of discussing God’s willing and loving. The objection is raised: ‘It seems <a id="page_125" class="calibre3"></a>that love does not exist in God. For in God there are no passions. Now love is a passion. Therefore love is not in God.’<sup class="calibre6">34</sup> Obviously, Aquinas wants to hold that God does love and does so supremely. He therefore distinguishes between passion and love within human beings and love (without passibility) within God.</p>
<p class="in">In response to the above objection Aquinas argues that passion in human beings pertains to the will and to the objects toward which the will tends. The will tends toward the good as an object known and so loved.<sup class="calibre6">35</sup> In human beings the knowledge of a thing as good arouses the sensitive appetite (pertaining to the senses) with its concomitant sensible emotion, which in turn motivates the will to desire and obtain the good as loved. For example, I come to know someone and in so doing I find him or her to be good and attractive. This knowledge arouses within me thoughts and feelings of love and affection and so my will desires to express this love in the hope of becoming friends with the person. For Aquinas, this process, this arousal of the sensitive appetite through sensitive knowledge with its concomitant sensible emotion by a known and loved good is passion. ‘Therefore acts of the sensitive appetite, inasmuch as they have annexed to them some bodily change, are called passions.’<sup class="calibre6">36</sup> In human beings then passion denotes a twofold change. First, through knowledge of a known good the sensitive appetite is aroused, which carries with it a sensible bodily emotional change; and second, the will is thus motivated and moved to desire and obtain the good as loved.<sup class="calibre6">37</sup></p>
<p class="in">In contrast God does not undergo this passible process. God is not corporeal and so does not possess sensitive knowledge or a sensitive appetite. ‘Therefore, there is no passion in God.’<sup class="calibre6">38</sup> However, God does possess intellect and will. God, being pure act, knows and wills in the one act that he himself is.<sup class="calibre6">39</sup> While God does not then possess a sensitive intellect and a sensitive appetite, both of which pertain to human <a id="page_126" class="calibre3"></a>knowing and willing as a corporeal being, God does possess an intellectual appetite in that his will is focused on the known good and so loved. Therefore, ‘there are certain passions which, though they do not befit God as passions, do not signify anything by the nature of their species that is repugnant to the divine perfection.’<sup class="calibre6">40</sup> What Aquinas means here is that there are human passions which are not contrary to the nature of God but, because he possesses them not through a passible process but as part of his unchanging nature, they are not passions, strictly speaking, within him.</p>
<p class="bq1">From this it is manifest that joy and delight is properly in God. For just as the apprehended good and evil are the object of sensible appetite, so too, are they of intellective appetite….Hence, there are found in the intellective appetite, which is the will, operations that in the nature of their species are similar to the operations of the sensitive appetite, differing in that in the sensitive appetite there are passions because of its union to a bodily organ, whereas in the intellective appetite there are simple operations…. Since, then, joy and delight are not repugnant to God according to their species, but only in so far as they are passions, and since they are found in the will according to their species but not as passions, it remains that they are not lacking even to the divine will.<sup class="calibre6">41</sup></p>
<p class="pn">Aquinas can equally state that ‘Love, therefore, and joy and delight are passions, [but] in so far as they denote acts of the intellective appetite, they are not passions. It is in this latter sense that they are in God.’<sup class="calibre6">42</sup></p>
<p class="in">What has become evident from the above discussion is that Aquinas, in denying passion in God, is simply denying of God the passible, and so changing, process which is inherent within human passion. Thus there is no passion in God, not in the sense that he does not love, but because, being pure act, there is no need for an arousal of his will to love the good and so to come to desire the good and rejoice in it. God’s arousal to the good as loved, and so rejoicing and delighting in it, is eternally and perfectly in act.<sup class="calibre6">43</sup> If there were changeable and passible passions within God, as these are found in human beings, it would mean that he is not fully loving for he would have to actualize further ‘loving’ potential. This is why Aquinas states that God ‘loves without passion.’<sup class="calibre6">44</sup> This only means that he loves without undergoing the passible processes and changes that are inherent within human love. While God is not passionate in the sense that there are passible passionate changes within him, he can be said, although Aquinas does not say this, to be passionate in the sense that his will is fully and wholly fixed on the good as loved. <a id="page_127" class="calibre3"></a>Being fully in act his love is fully in act and therefore his passion is fully in act. God cannot become more passionate or loving by actualizing, as human beings do, some further potential and so become more passionate or loving. God is supremely passionate because he is supremely loving and he is both because both are fully in act since God as <i class="calibre5">ipsum esse</i> is pure act. This is why ‘God is love’ (1 Jn 4:6). God would not be simply love if he were not pure love in act, and thus absolute passion in act. God is impassible precisely because he is supremely passionate and cannot become any more passionate.<sup class="calibre6">45</sup> God simply loves himself and all things in himself in the one act which he himself is.<sup class="calibre6">46</sup></p>
<p class="in">At this juncture we need to interconnect and develop what we have achieved thus far.</p>
<p class="sec"><b class="calibre8">The Trinity as the One God is Utterly Relational</b></p>
<p class="pn">From our doctrinal examination of the persons of the Trinity as subsistent relations and from our philosophical study of God as <i class="calibre5">ipsum esse</i> what we have discovered is that both converge upon the notion of ‘pure act.’ As subsistent relations, the Father, the Son, and the Holy Spirit are fully in act in that they are constituted and defined only in the act of being inter-related to one another. Because the persons of the Trinity are subsistent relations fully in act they are verbs (pure acts) and not nouns (substances). Equally, the nature of God, as conceived philosophically, is pure act – <i class="calibre5">ipsum esse</i> or <i class="calibre5">actus purus</i> – and so is a verb as well. While Aquinas does not bring out this relationship, in that he never addresses the relationship between God being <i class="calibre5">ipsum esse</i> and being a trinity of persons, yet he does state that ‘relation really existing in God has the existence of the divine essence in no way distinct therefrom….Thus it is clear that in God relation and essence do not differ from each other, but are one and the same.’<sup class="calibre6">47</sup></p>
<p class="in">Therefore, it is <i class="calibre5">ipsum esse</i> which grounds the trinity of persons as being subsistent relations fully in act – pure verbs, and likewise, it is the trinity of persons as subsistent relations fully in act which grounds their being <i class="calibre5">ipsum esse</i> – pure verb. There is an inherent ontological reciprocal constitutive relationship, or better, a reciprocal constitutive ontological oneness, between being <i class="calibre5">ipsum esse</i> and being subsistent relations (and vice-versa) for both express ‘being’ as <i class="calibre5">actus purus</i>. What we see then from the convergence of our doctrinal and philosophical study is that to be fully ‘to-be’ (<i class="calibre5">ipsum esse</i>) is ‘to be fully relational’ (a subsistent relation).<sup class="calibre6">48</sup></p>
<p class="in"><a id="page_128" class="calibre3"></a>For our present study a very important point must now be grasped. God, whether considered under the philosophical rubric of <i class="calibre5">ipsum esse</i> or under the doctrinal rubric of a trinity of persons as subsisting relations fully in act, has no self-constituting relational potential which needs to be actualized in order to make him/them more relational. Since the persons of the Trinity are immutable as subsistent relations fully in act in accordance with their being pure being, they do not have any self-constituting relational potential which needs to be actualized in order to make them more relational. This lack of any self-constituting relational potential, since they are subsistent relations fully in act, gives to the persons of the Trinity absolute positive relational potential, that is, they have the singular ability to establish relationships with others other than themselves whereby the persons of the Trinity can relate others to themselves as they are in themselves as a trinity of persons.</p>
<p class="in">Because human beings are not fully relational, they must relate and be related to one another through mediating actions – hugs and kisses. They must actualize their latent and inert relational potential and so positively become related to one another through their actions. This brings about change in human beings. The persons of the Trinity need not, and cannot, do this.</p>
<p class="in">The persons of the Trinity, being fully actualized relations in accordance with being pure being, contain no potency which needs to be actualized or overcome through new actions in order to establish new relations. Because the persons of the Trinity are subsistent relations fully in act, and so are entirely related to one another as they are in themselves, whatever is related to the persons of the Trinity is, in some manner, related to them as they are in themselves. No mediating actions, actions which would involve change on the part of the persons of the Trinity, lie between or establish the relations between the persons of the Trinity and the one(s) to whom they are related. The only change is in the other who is related to the persons of the Trinity, for the other is, in some manner, <a id="page_129" class="calibre3"></a>newly related to the persons of the Trinity as they exist in themselves and is so changed in being so related. Thus, and this is absolutely essential to our present study, to be related to the Trinity, in whatever manner, is to be related in the most intimate and dynamic manner. No other relationships could exceed their intimacy and vitality. Let us examine then the Creator-creature relationship both to exemplify this and to lay more of the foundation for discussing further God’s relationship with human beings.</p>
<p class="sec"><b class="calibre8">God and the Act of Creation</b></p>
<p class="pn">The act of creation establishes the foundational relationship between God and creatures. Because of this it forms the type of relation God has with creatures and the type of relation creatures have with God. Thus it is essential that this relationship be understood properly if we are to assess correctly whether or not God loves his creation, especially human beings, and in so doing is compassionate and merciful towards them, and ultimately whether or not he suffers with them and on their behalf. Again I wish to build upon what we have discovered thus far about the persons of the Trinity being subsistent relations and about the nature of God, as a trinity of subsistent relations, being <i class="calibre5">ipsum esse</i> or <i class="calibre5">actus purus</i>.</p>
<p class="in">Normally when considering the act of creation, philosophy and theology have focused almost exclusively upon the oneness of God. This is so for a twofold reason. First, the act of creation is seen primarily as springing from the fact that God is <i class="calibre5">ipsum esse</i> and as such gives being (<i class="calibre5">esse</i>) to creatures. Creation is understood more in the light of philosophy, from what we can learn from reason about God and his creative relationship to his creatures, than from what has been revealed about God as a trinity. Second, especially within the western tradition founded upon Augustine and developed by Anselm and Aquinas, it has been stressed that all acts of God outside of himself are done as one. The Council of Florence affirmed that, where there is no opposition of relation among the persons of the Trinity, all is done as one. Thus the trinity of persons are ‘not three principles of creation, but one principle.’<sup class="calibre6">49</sup> While I do not want to deny the truth contained in the above, I believe that too narrow a reading diminishes the Christian understanding and significance of creation, and can even distort the tradition, especially the teaching of Aquinas. However, for the sake of clarity and order, and therefore, hopefully, ease of understanding, I will first examine and develop Aquinas’ philosophical understanding of the Creator-creature relationship, and then place it within the context of the <a id="page_130" class="calibre3"></a>Trinity, something which Aquinas intimated but never fully developed.<sup class="calibre6">50</sup></p>
<p class="in">For Aquinas relations are of three types.<sup class="calibre6">51</sup> First, there are mutual logical relations or relations according to reason (sometimes also referred to as ‘unreal’ relations). These relations are made by and in the mind, such as relating Fido to the canine species. Since the relation is mental, neither term is changed or affected by the relation. Second, there are real relations. These relations are founded upon something that is real within the two terms, such as the relation between a parent and a child, or a husband and a wife. Normally considered these relationships bring about a change or effect within the terms for they are established by some mediating action between the two terms.<sup class="calibre6">52</sup> Third, there are relations where the relation is real in one term and logical in another. These mixed relations occur when the terms are not in the same ontological order, such as that between a knower and the known, the Creator and the creature, and the Son of God and his humanity. In such a relationship the real term is affected or changed (the knower, the creature, and Christ’s humanity), but the logical term (the known, the Creator, and the Son of God) are not changed by the relationship.<sup class="calibre6">53</sup> It is this mixed relation, as exemplified in the Creator-creature relation, that we must examine more closely for it is pivotal for the validity of the present argument.</p>
<p class="in">For Aquinas, ‘Creation signified actively means the divine action, which is God’s essence, with a relation to the creature. But in God, relation to the creature is not real, but only a relation of reason; whereas the relation of the creature to God is a real relation.’<sup class="calibre6">54</sup> At first sight, as Aquinas’ critics are incessantly pointing out, this appears to mean that while creation is related to God, God is not related to the creature. If this interpretation were correct, it would not only disavow and exclude God’s love for and care of creation, but it would even more critically <a id="page_131" class="calibre3"></a>repudiate that God was actually the Creator. Such a position would be sheer nonsense and, moreover, one that Aquinas would hardly espouse.</p>
<p class="in">To interpret him properly what must first be grasped is that, for Aquinas, ‘to create’ is to bring something into being and so pertains, not so much to what a thing is, but more specifically to that it is.<sup class="calibre6">55</sup> Thus the act of creation does not imply motion, change, or succession, for motion, change, and succession only take place in previously existing beings. The act of creation is something much more radical and even more dynamic than any possible change which may occur among existing beings, that is, the establishment of the creature itself as existing. The effect of the act of creation in the creature is the existence of the creature itself.<sup class="calibre6">56</sup> ‘Creation is not a change, but the very dependence of the created act of being upon the principle from which it is produced.’<sup class="calibre6">57</sup> This is why the relation between the Creator and creature is real in the creature.<sup class="calibre6">58</sup> It is more real and more dynamic than any mutually real relation among creatures for it is a relationship that establishes and sustains the very existence of the creature. If the relationship ceased to be, the creature would cease to be.<sup class="calibre6">59</sup> As Aquinas states: ‘Creation places something in the thing created according to relation only, because what is created, is not made by movement, or change…. Creation in the creature is nothing but a certain relation to the creator as to the principle of its being.’<sup class="calibre6">60</sup> The act of creation then is a relation fully in act in that it is only by continuously being related to God that the creature exists.</p>
<p class="in"><a id="page_132" class="calibre3"></a>Second, ‘to create,’ as Aquinas states, signifies action on the part of God. God truly acts, but since he is pure act, the act of creation signifies no other action than the pure act that God is.<sup class="calibre6">61</sup> God can act in no other way, not to his detriment and to our disadvantage but to his capability and to our benefit, for the act of creation itself demands that God act by <a id="page_133" class="calibre3"></a>no other act than the pure act that he is as <i class="calibre5">ipsum esse</i> for no other act is capable of such a singular effect.<sup class="calibre6">62</sup> If God were to change in the act of creation, it would mean that he acted by some other act than the pure act that he is, but this is impossible both because God is pure act and because creation itself demands an immutably pure act.<sup class="calibre6">63</sup> The immutability of <a id="page_134" class="calibre3"></a>God as pure act, far from being an impairment to creating, is the absolute prolegomenon and, literally, <i class="calibre5">sine qua non</i> for creating.<sup class="calibre6">64</sup></p>
<p class="in">Third, we must clearly grasp the full significance of what it means for God to be the logical term in the Creator-creature relationship. For God to be the logical term is not something negative in God as if he were not closely related, and least of all does it mean that his relation is ‘unreal’ in the sense that his relationship to creation is non-existent. Rather, to be the logical term specifies and clarifies the exact nature of the real relation in the creature, that is a relatedness to God as he is in himself which establishes the very being and continued existence of the creature, and in so doing it clarifies and specifies the exact nature of God’s relation to the creature, that is a relatedness to the creature as the creature is. For God to be the logical term means then that he is supremely related in the most intimate and dynamic manner, for if God creates by no other act than the pure act that he is, and if the creature only is by being related to the pure act that God is, then God is actually related to and present in the creature by his very essence, that is by the pure act that he is. Aquinas writes:</p>
<p class="bq1">God is in all things; not, indeed, as part of their essence, nor as an accident; but as an agent is present to that upon which it works…. Now since God is very being by his own essence, created being must be his proper effect…. Now God causes this effect in things not only when they first begin to be, but as long as they are preserved in being….Therefore as long as a thing has being, God must be present to it; according to its mode of being. But being is innermost in each thing and most fundamentally inherent in all things since it is formal in respect of everything found in a thing. Hence it must be that God is in all things, and innermostly.<sup class="calibre6">65</sup></p>
<p class="in"><a id="page_135" class="calibre3"></a>Now relationships between, for example, human beings are radically different from the Creator-creature relationship for they are always established through or by some mediating act (a hug or a kiss). The relation is established, by what I would call, ‘act’ to ‘act,’ that is both persons are engaged in the <i class="calibre5">act</i> of kissing and so are related, but because the relationship is established through some mediating act (a kiss) the two people are never related to one another as each fully is. However, this is not the case in the Creator-creature relationship. While the relationship between God and creatures is equally ‘act’ to ‘act,’ it is not mediated nor is it a partial expression of their being, but rather the complete and utter expression of their being. The ‘act’ (the <i class="calibre5">esse</i>) by which the creature is a creature only is ‘act’ because it is related to the ‘act’ by which God is (<i class="calibre5">ipsum esse</i>).<sup class="calibre6">66</sup> The Creator-creature relation is an unmediated relationship between the pure act of God as <i class="calibre5">ipsum esse</i> and the act, the <i class="calibre5">esse</i>, by which the creature is.<sup class="calibre6">67</sup> The creature is totally defined as a creature in this relation for it establishes the creature as created.<sup class="calibre6">68</sup> Moreover, unlike relations between human beings, the Creator-creature relation is perpetual and uninterrupted. Thus, this relation is absolutely immediate (no mediating action), supremely dynamic (pure act to created act), utterly intimate (a relation between God as he is in himself <a id="page_136" class="calibre3"></a>and the creature as it is in itself), and unbreakably enduring (it can never be severed).<sup class="calibre6">69</sup></p>
<p class="in">Fourth, it is now also evident why God the Creator, as pure act, is not <a id="page_137" class="calibre3"></a>one of many beings nor can he be numbered as one of many beings. God as pure <i class="calibre5">esse</i> ontologically transcends the order of created beings because he does not have a quiddity other than his <i class="calibre5">esse</i>, and thus unlike finite beings, he does not have an essence that would place him within a genus.<sup class="calibre6">70</sup> Moreover, it is the act of creation which both establishes and <a id="page_138" class="calibre3"></a>manifests God’s ontological distinctiveness and so his transcendence, and simultaneously his relation to the created order and so his immanence.<sup class="calibre6">71</sup></p>
<p class="sec"><b class="calibre8">The Trinity and the Act of Creation</b></p>
<p class="pn">In order to appreciate the full significance of what we have just philosophically established concerning the Creator-creature relationship, we must now place it within the context of the Trinity.<sup class="calibre6">72</sup> While the Trinity does act <i class="calibre5">ad extra</i> as one, as the tradition demands, God never acts generically <a id="page_139" class="calibre3"></a>as the one God, for the one God is a trinity of persons and must act as such. It must be remembered that, for Aquinas, ‘Creation signified actively means the divine action, which is God’s essence,’ and that God’s essence is the same as the trinity of persons.<sup class="calibre6">73</sup> Therefore, God never acts as <i class="calibre5">ipsum esse</i> or <i class="calibre5">actus purus</i> apart from doing so as a trinity of persons. Moreover, while the Hebrew tradition sees the one God as Creator, in the light of subsequent Christian revelation the act of creation must be conceived as the act of God in so far as the one God <i class="calibre5">is</i> a trinity of persons.<sup class="calibre6">74</sup> The act of creation is common to all three persons and as such it is the act of the one God, but this one act must be predicated of them in a manner that is appropriate to each person. Aquinas argues that creation cannot be said properly of any one of the three persons singularly ‘since it is common to the whole Trinity.’ However, it is not common to the Trinity generically as the one God.</p>
<p class="bq1">The divine persons, according to the nature of their procession, have a causality respecting the creation of things…. Hence God the Father made the creature through his Word, which is his Son; and through his Love, which is the Holy Spirit. And so the processions of the persons are the type of the production of creatures inasmuch as they include the essential attributes, knowledge and will.<sup class="calibre6">75</sup></p>
<p class="in"><a id="page_140" class="calibre3"></a>Further for Aquinas, while all three persons share in the divine nature, they do so ‘in a kind of order.’ The Son receives his divinity from the Father and the Holy Spirit receives it from the Father and the Son, and therefore this same order is maintained within the act of creation. The term Creator is attributed to the Father for he receives his power to create from no other, but he creates through the Son, his Word, and through the Holy Spirit, his goodness and love.<sup class="calibre6">76</sup></p>
<p class="in">Now, what Aquinas does not fully articulate is that the Trinity–creature relationship is a mixed relation. Since the persons of the Trinity share in the pure act of divine being as subsistent relations fully in act, they possess no self-constituting relational potential and so they embrace the singular ability to relate, in the act of creation, the creature to themselves as they are, and are therefore related to the creature as who they are in themselves. The Trinity is the ‘logical term’ of the relationship in that the creature only comes to be and so is ‘really related’ to the Trinity as the Trinity is. Thus, as we saw above in our philosophical inquiry, the Trinity-creature relation is equally absolutely immediate (no mediating action between the Trinity and the creature), supremely dynamic (the persons of the Trinity fully in act related to the created act by which the creature is), utterly intimate (a relation between the trinity of persons as they truly exist in themselves and the creature as it is in itself), and unbreakably enduring (it can never be severed). Moreover, if we now add to this that the creature involved in this relationship is a human person, it means that the trinity of persons are actually and fully related to the human person as they are in themselves, for the human person is related to them as they are. The relation between the Trinity and a human person is absolutely relational and utterly personal, for the human person (the human ‘I’) only exists as a human person (a human ‘I’) by being related to the persons (the divine ‘I’s’) of the Trinity in a personal manner – the human ‘I’ to the ‘I’ of each divine person.</p>
<p class="in">In this regard one further very significant point must be made more explicit. Each creature, and more importantly, each human person, is related to each person of the Trinity in a singular manner or according to the proper order within the Trinity, that is, the creature or human person is related to the Father as the Father is, to the Son as the Son is, and to the Holy Spirit as the Holy Spirit is.</p>
<p class="in">This is why Aquinas could state that the name ‘Word’ signifies a relation to creatures:</p>
<p class="bq1"><a id="page_141" class="calibre3"></a>Word implies relation to creatures. For God by knowing himself, knows every creature. Now the word conceived in the mind is representative of everything that is actually understood. Hence there are in themselves different words for different things which we understand. But because God by one act understands himself and all things, his one only Word is expressive not only of the Father, but of all creation. And as the knowledge of God is only cognitive as regards God, whereas as regards creatures, it is both cognitive and operative, so the Word of God is only expressive of what is in God the Father, but is both expressive and operative of creatures; and therefore it is said (Ps. 33:9): ‘He spoke, and they were made’; because in the Word is implied the operative idea of what God makes.<sup class="calibre6">77</sup></p>
<p class="in">God the Father is the author of creation not only because he knows the whole of creation in his Word, but also because he creates what is known in the Word through the Word. Thus creation is related to the Father not only as known in the Word, but it is also related to the Father through the Word. Moreover, then, the Word is related to creation not only as the one in whom the Father knows creation, but also as the one through whom creation comes to be. Thus creation is related to the Word not only as the one in whom it is known by the Father, but also as the one through whom it is created. The Father’s knowledge of creation is the most thorough, dynamic and intimate, for he knows creation in the very act of begetting his Son or speaking his Word. Thus he knows creation in the very same act by which he knows himself – through the Word.<sup class="calibre6">78</sup></p>
<p class="in">Aquinas similarly states concerning the Holy Spirit:</p>
<p class="bq1">The Father loves not only the Son, but also himself and us, by the Holy Spirit…. Hence, as the Father speaks himself and every creature by his begotten Word, inasmuch as the Word <i class="calibre5">begotten</i> adequately represents the Father and every creature; so he loves himself and every creature by the Holy Spirit, inasmuch as the Holy Spirit proceeds as the love of the primal goodness whereby the Father loves himself and every creature.<sup class="calibre6">79</sup></p>
<p class="pn">As the Father knows the whole of creation in the Word and so creates through the Word, so the Father loves not only his Son but also the whole of creation in the Holy Spirit, and it is because of this love (in this Spirit) that he creates it through his Word. As the Father lovingly begets his Son in the Spirit so the Father lovingly creates, in the same Spirit, through his Word. Thus creatures participate in the same intimate, passionate, divine <a id="page_142" class="calibre3"></a>love of the Spirit in which the Father and Son love one another, and so are related to the Father and to the Son in the same passionate love of the Spirit.</p>
<p class="in">We clearly perceive now the awesome truth that because creatures, especially human persons, are in the act of creation related to the persons of the Trinity as they are in their own subsistent relations, and so are related to each person of the Trinity in a specific and proper manner, they are assumed into the very mystery of the Trinity itself. Thus the act of creation mirrors, though imperfectly, the processions within the Trinity.<sup class="calibre6">80</sup> ‘It is evident that relation to the creature is implied both in the Word and in the proceeding Love, as it were in a secondary way, inasmuch as the divine truth and goodness are a principle of understanding and loving all creatures.’<sup class="calibre6">81</sup></p>
<p class="in">To confirm the absolute love of God for creation one further point must be made concerning the Trinity. Aquinas states that there are two reasons why knowledge of the divine persons is necessary.</p>
<p class="bq1">[Firstly,] it was necessary for the right idea of creation. The fact of saying that God made all things by his Word excludes the error of those who say that God produced things by necessity. When we say that in him there is a procession of love, we show that God produced creatures not because he needed them, nor because of any <a id="page_143" class="calibre3"></a>other extrinsic reason, but on account of the love of his own goodness.<sup class="calibre6">82</sup></p>
<p class="in">That we needed a knowledge of the Trinity in order to have a proper understanding of creation seems, at first sight, a rather strange argument, yet it is one of Aquinas’ great insights. The lack of such knowledge and its consequences were readily exemplified in the various pagan traditions and Greek philosophies. The pagan gods needed creatures for their own happiness, and even within Platonic emanationism and Stoic pantheism the world was a necessary correlative to God.<sup class="calibre6">83</sup> Even the Jewish people, despite their belief in the One Creator God, were not immune from pagan influences, as their history manifests. However, the revelation that God is a Trinity establishes the ontological independent transcendence of God in that God as a trinity of persons is already self-fulfilled both by way of knowledge and of love. The Father knows himself perfectly in his Word and loves himself perfectly in the Holy Spirit. This does not imply a selfish, self-centered and self-contained deity, but the exact opposite. The transcendent independence of the Trinity, as Wholly Other, allows the act of creation to be a sheer act of the Trinity’s loving goodness and freedom. Because they possess no self-fulfilling needs, they are motivated solely by their beneficent and altruistic love to bring others into existence and so bestow upon them their goodness. Commenting on Dionysius, Aquinas states:</p>
<p class="bq1">Divine love did ‘not’ allow ‘him to remain in himself without fruit,’ that is, without the production of creatures, but love ‘moved him to operate according’ to a most excellent mode of operation according as he produced all things in being (<i class="calibre5">esse</i>). For from love of his goodness it proceeded that he willed to pour out and to communicate his goodness to others, insofar as it is possible, namely by way of similitude, and that his goodness did not remain in him, but flowed out into others.<sup class="calibre6">84</sup></p>
<p class="sec"><a id="page_144" class="calibre2"></a><b class="calibre8">Summary and Conclusions</b></p>
<p class="pn">In order to pull together all the components of this chapter, I will first summarize the main points. I have argued, from revelation, that the persons of the Trinity are subsistent relations fully in act, and therefore are immutable and impassible, not in the sense of being static and inert, but as being unconditionally active and supremely passionate. I have equally argued, from reason, that God is pure act, and therefore consummately dynamic in his immutability and wholly passionate in his impassibility. Moreover, I proceeded to demonstrate that because the persons of the Trinity are subsistent relations fully in act, in that they share the one pure act of divine existence, they possess no self-constituting relational potential, and therefore, they are fully relational. This allows the divine persons to relate others to themselves as they are in themselves. The act of creation exemplifies this. The act of creation, as a mixed relation, specifies that the persons of the Trinity relate the creature to themselves as they are, and so, reciprocally, are actually related to the creature as the creature is. Thus, this relationship is immediate, dynamic, intimate, and enduring. Moreover, because the Father knows and so creates through his Word and because he loves and so creates in the Holy Spirit, the creature is thoroughly known through the Word and fully embraced in the love of the Spirit. When the creature is a human person, this relationship acquires as well an altogether dynamic and a totally intimate personalism.</p>
<p class="in">I will now draw a number of conclusions. First, I have argued throughout this study that any theological or philosophical understanding of God must explicate, sustain and confirm the biblical notion <a id="page_145" class="calibre3"></a>of God, that is that God is wholly other than the created realm, and yet simultaneously is present to and active within the created realm as the Wholly Other, without losing his total otherness in so doing. In other words, the proper and authentic biblical notion of divine transcendence and immanence must be theologically elucidated and philosophically maintained. I believe I have done so on both accounts. 1) The persons of the Trinity are wholly other than the created order in that they are subsistent relations fully in act sharing the one pure act of <i class="calibre5">ipsum esse</i>. Their mode or manner of existence is ontologically distinct from all else, and in this sense they are absolutely transcendent. Yet, it is this very mode or manner of utter transcendence which allows the persons of the Trinity, as Creator, to be equally present to and active within the created order in all their complete otherness without losing their wholly otherness in so being related. 2) Philosophically, I have argued that the act of creation demands that God be <i class="calibre5">ipsum esse</i>, and so creates by no other act than the pure act that he is. This establishes and confirms, philosophically, the total otherness of God and the ontological distinction between God and the order of creation. Simultaneously, it clarifies and equally confirms that God as the Wholly Other, in that he is <i class="calibre5">ipsum esse</i>, is immediately related and so present to the created order as the Wholly Other without losing his complete otherness in so being present, in that the created order is related to him as he is in himself and so is. It is precisely this understanding of God, both by way of revelation and reason, that the Bible demands, and only this biblical notion of God as absolutely transcendent allows for the corresponding biblical notion of radical divine immanence.</p>
<p class="in">Second, I have tried to clarify, but not render comprehensible, a number of fundamental mysteries of the Judeo-Christian faith.<sup class="calibre6">85</sup> Hopefully, our understanding of the persons of the Trinity as subsistent relations fully in act and the nature of God as pure act (and the significant consequences that flow from these) are now more intelligible and evident. Yet, it is impossible to comprehend either. We just cannot comprehend what it means to be a subsistent relation fully in act nor what it means to be pure act. Moreover, the trinitarian act of creation is also, hopefully, more intelligible. Yet again, we cannot comprehend how the persons of the Trinity act as pure act in creating. Nor then, can we comprehend how the Trinity can be wholly immanent as the Wholly Other without losing its wholly transcendent otherness in so being. This too is in keeping with the biblical understanding of God and his actions. He reveals himself and so makes himself known, through word and action, as the unknowable and the incomprehensible. It is here that the mind must bow in adoration and the heart burst forth in praise.</p>
<p class="in">Third, what holds the entire argument of this chapter together, in all of its inter-related components, is the notion of ‘act’ – which, it must be remembered, is a verb. It is the persons of the Trinity as subsistent relations fully in act, sharing in the pure act of divine being (<i class="calibre5">ipsum esse</i>), <a id="page_146" class="calibre3"></a>which makes possible, establishes, and grounds the Trinity-creature relationship and all that flows from it – its immediacy, dynamism, intimacy, and persistency. Ultimately, it is this notion of ‘act’ that both renders more intelligible the mysteries of faith that we have examined, and yet simultaneously, preserves and sustains their mystery, for we cannot comprehend that which is a pure verb (pure act) and nothing more.</p>
<p class="in">Fourth, the divine attributes of immutability and impassibility are thus essential to the above understanding of ‘act’ for they insure both that the trinity of persons, as subsistent relations, are fully in act and cannot become any more in ‘act’ through change and mutation, and that God, considered as <i class="calibre5">ipsum esse</i>, is pure act and cannot become any more in act through change and mutation. Far from designating the Trinity or God as static and inert, these attributes affirm, protect, and sustain the absolute dynamism and pure passion of God’s divine nature as a trinity of persons. Thus, there is no dialectic opposition between the Trinity’s immutability and impassibility and its ability to love and to relate. Rather, as I have argued, these attributes, far from being a detriment or a hindrance to the Trinity’s ability to love and to relate to others other than itself, are actually the presuppositions and prolegomena for its so doing in a singular divine manner. To imperil or discard the attributes of immutability and impassibility would thus disfigure the beauty and nullify the truth of the Creator–creature relationship. To conceive God or the Trinity as mutable and passible is to proffer a relationship with creatures that is literally impotent and thoroughly impoverished.</p>
<p class="in">Last, I believe I have given theological clarity and philosophical precision to the teaching of the Fathers. I have theologically and philosophically clarified and developed their teaching on why God is immutable and impassible, and equally I have demonstrated, hopefully more clearly and consistently than they did, why God is yet supremely active and loving. Thus, I have confirmed their basic theological teaching and exploited their philosophical instincts, and in so doing I have attempted to locate these on a more stable theological and philosophical footing.</p>
<p class="in">There is yet one more issue, one more piece of the puzzle, that needs to be examined before we take up the topic of whether or not God in himself suffers, that is, the nature of evil as the cause of suffering. In the next chapter, we will discuss this topic and then, in the light of it, turn to the question of whether God, as loving, merciful and compassionate, suffers with and on behalf of human beings.</p>
<p class="ntcon">1  Throughout this chapter Aquinas will be my primary, but not exclusive guide. I use the word ‘guide’ with regards to Aquinas purposefully. While I will be in basic agreement with much of what Aquinas teaches, I will also attempt to clarify, correct, and even, at times, go beyond what he proposes.</p>
<p class="ntnlf">2  See the standard histories on the development of the doctrine of the Trinity. For example: S.G. Hall, <i class="calibre5">Doctrine and Practice in the Early Church</i> (London: SPCK, 1991); J.N.D. Kelly, <i class="calibre5">Early Christian Doctrines;</i> Pelikan, <i class="calibre5">The Christian Tradition 1;</i> Studer, <i class="calibre5">Trinity and Incarnation;</i> A.W. Wainwright, <i class="calibre5">The Trinity in the New Testament</i> (London: SPCK, 1962).</p>
<p class="ntnlf">3  Gregory of Nazianzus wrote that ‘the difference of manifestation, if I may so express myself, or rather of their mutual relations one to another, has caused the difference of their names’ (<i class="calibre5">Oratio</i>, 31, 9). See Augustine, <i class="calibre5">De Trinitate</i>, VI: 6, 9, 11, 14; VII, 9. Aquinas defines a divine person as ‘a relation as subsisting’ (<i class="calibre5">Summa Theologica</i> [hereafter, <i class="calibre5">ST</i>], I, 29, 4). Also see I, 40. For the <i class="calibre5">ST</i> I am using the translation by the Fathers of the English Dominican Province (New York: Benziger Brothers, 1947).</p>
<p class="ntnl">Aquinas notes that, unlike other genera such as quantity and quality which signify something inherent in a subject, the notion of relation ‘in its own proper meaning signifies only what refers to another’ (<i class="calibre5">ST</i>, I, 28, 1). Thus ‘relation’ signifies ‘a way of being <i class="calibre5">towards</i>.’ As subsistent relations the persons of the Trinity are completely and solely defined insofar as they ‘are for’ one another. W. Kasper writes: ‘The three persons of the Trinity are pure relationality; they are relations in which the one nature of God exists in three distinct and non-interchangeable ways. They are subsistent relations.’ <i class="calibre5">The God of Jesus Christ</i>, p. 309. See also pp. 279–81, 289–90.</p>
<p class="ntnl">See also W. Hill, <i class="calibre5">The Three-Personed God</i> (Washington, DC: Catholic University of America Press, 1982), pp. 71–73; L. Boff, <i class="calibre5">Trinity and Society</i> (New York: Orbis, 1988), pp. 57, 92, 127, 138; and Pannenberg, <i class="calibre5">Systematic Theology</i>, Vol. 1, pp. 322–25, 428–31.</p>
<p class="ntnlf">4  Of course a parent or a child remains such even after death and so continues to be related in this sense. However, because human persons are not totally defined by their relationships, a child can remain alive even if its parents die, or vice-versa.</p>
<p class="ntnlf">5  J. Galot argues that the very nature of being a person is to be relational. Thus he proposes that human persons, as well as divine persons, are subsistent relations, that is, our relations constitute who we are – our identity. Nonetheless, as human persons we only form relationships through our nature as human beings, and so, while our relationships define who we are, we always have further relational potential to be actualized. While Galot emphasizes the similarity between divine and human persons, an emphasis I would agree with, here I wish to highlight the dissimilarity. See J. Galot, <i class="calibre5">The Person of Christ</i> (Rome: Gregorian University Press, 1981 and Chicago: Franciscan Herald Press, 1983); and <i class="calibre5">Who is Christ?</i> (Chicago: Franciscan Herald Press, 1981), pp. 279–313.</p>
<p class="ntnlf">6  Of course there can be hostile relations mediated through words of anger and hatred or through actions of spitefulness and fighting.</p>
<p class="ntnl">There is also one exception to what has just been stated. While the inter-relationship between human persons only partially defines each human person, a human person is entirely defined as ‘a creature’ in relationship to God as Creator. This relationship, unlike other relationships, cannot be broken for if it were broken, the human person would cease to exist. What makes the Creator-creature relationship unique will be discussed later in this chapter.</p>
<p class="ntnlf">7  See Aquinas, <i class="calibre5">ST</i>, I, 28, 4; I, 29, 4; I, 36, 2, ad 7; I, 40, 2; I, 40, 4. Aquinas states: ‘Now the divine persons are multiplied by reason of their origin; and origin includes the idea of someone from whom another comes, and of someone that comes from another, and by these two modes a person can be known’ (<i class="calibre5">ST</i>, I, 32, 3). Or again: In the divine persons distinction is founded on origin. But origin can be properly designated only by certain acts. Wherefore, to signify the order of origin in the divine persons, we must attribute notional acts to the persons’ (<i class="calibre5">ST</i>, I, 41, 1). See also Gregory of Nyssa, <i class="calibre5">Quod non sint tres</i>, and Gregory of Nazianzus, <i class="calibre5">Oratio</i>, 29, 2 and 31, 8–9.</p>
<p class="ntnlf">8  Aquinas states that it is better to say that the Father is the principle rather than the cause of the Son and the Holy Spirit since ‘<i class="calibre5">cause</i> seems to mean diversity of substance, and dependence of one from another; which is not implied in the word <i class="calibre5">principle</i>. For in all kinds of causes there is always to be found between the cause and the effect a distance of perfection or of power; whereas we use the term <i class="calibre5">principle</i> even in things which have no such difference, but have only a certain order to each other’ (<i class="calibre5">ST</i>, I, 33, 1, ad 1).</p>
<p class="ntnl">Moreover, unlike the causal temporal act of human begetting which becomes a ‘finished’ or ‘completed’ act, the eternal act of begetting does not cease, and therefore it is more a continuous principle rather than a finished cause. Likewise, for the Father to be the origin of the Son and the Holy Spirit does not then imply a causal precedence, priority, or sequence. See D. Braine, <i class="calibre5">The Reality of Time and the Existence of God</i> (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1988), p. 122.</p>
<p class="ntnlf">9  The conception of the Trinity that I am both summarizing and further developing here is the one I put forth in my book <i class="calibre5">The Father’s Spirit of Sonship: Reconceiving the Trinity</i> (Edinburgh: T &amp; T Clark, 1995). There I argued for the thesis that the Father begets the Son in or by the Holy Spirit. The Son is begotten in the Spirit, and thus the Spirit simultaneously proceeds from the Father as the one in whom the Son is begotten. This conception of the Trinity, I argue, gives to the Holy Spirit a proper defining active role within the Trinity, and in so doing not only gives greater symmetry to the Trinity, but also better accounts for why the Holy Spirit is a person, that is, an active member along with the Father and the Son in the constituting of the trinitarian relationships.</p>
<p class="ntull">10  In my book <i class="calibre5">The Father’s Spirit of Sonship</i> I argued that, while Aquinas emphasized that the Father, the Son, and the Holy Spirit subsist as relations of opposition, they equally subsist as relations of complementarity to one another.</p>
<p class="bq1f">The Father is Father not only in opposition to the Son and the Son is Son not only in opposition to the Father, but they also, in their relatedness complement one another as being, respectively, Father for the Son and Son for the Father. This complementarity of the persons as subsistent relations is due again to the Holy Spirit. By being the one in whom the Father begets the Son and so is Father for the Son, and by being the one in whom the Son is begotten and so is Son for the Father, the Holy Spirit subsists as the source of their complementarity. The Trinity of persons then subsists in opposition to one another only as complementary relations. Pp. 82–83.</p>
<p class="ntull">11  In <i class="calibre5">The Father’s Spirit of Sonship</i> I emphasize that there is a ‘<i class="calibre5">perichoresis of action</i>.’</p>
<p class="bq1f">While, in both the East and the West, the <i class="calibre5">perichoresis</i> or circumincession has been seen as <i class="calibre5">the result</i> of the begetting and the spirating, I have emphasized the <i class="calibre5">perichoresis</i> of the actions themselves. Because the Father spirates the Spirit as he begets the Son, for it is in the Spirit that the Son is begotten, there is a <i class="calibre5">perichoresis</i> of action – the acts of begetting and spiration co-inhere in one another and thus account for why the persons themselves co-inhere. Actually, the persons themselves are the co-inhering acts. This <i class="calibre5">perichoresis</i> of the trinitarian act gives an unprecedented dynamism to the persons and to their life within the Trinity. Pp. 79–80.</p>
<p class="ntull">12  Aquinas holds that the Holy Spirit does not possess a proper name, but can appropriately be called Holy Spirit because he is spirated and, like the Father and the Son, he is both spirit and holy. See <i class="calibre5">ST</i>, I, 27, 4, ad 3; I, 28, 4; I, 36, 1. Aquinas based this idea on Augustine, <i class="calibre5">De Trinitate</i>, V, 12.</p>
<p class="ntnl">In <i class="calibre5">The Father’s Spirit of Sonship</i>, I state:</p>
<p class="bq1f">The Holy Spirit does not have a distinct name because he subsists precisely as the one in whom the Father and the Son are named. The Father subsists in relation to the Son (and so is named Father) only in the Holy Spirit by whom he begot the Son. The Son subsists in relation to the Father (and so is named Son) only in the Holy Spirit who conformed him to be Son. The Spirit subsists as a pure relation together with the Father and the Son in that he sustains their relationship and so imparts or manifests their names. The Holy Spirit is the hidden or unnamed person or ‘who’ because the very nature of his subjectivity as a subsistent relation is to illuminate or, more deeply, to substantiate or person the Father and the Son for one another…. This is in keeping with the Holy Spirit’s economic mission. The role of the Spirit in the economy of salvation is not to make himself known, but to manifest the love of God the Father and Jesus as Son. Pp. 84–85.</p>
<p class="ntnl">See also, C. Gunton, <i class="calibre5">The One, the Three and the Many</i> (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1993), p. 190; Kasper, <i class="calibre5">The God of Jesus Christ</i>, pp. 198, 223; and H.U. von Balthasar, <i class="calibre5">Explorations in Theology</i> III: <i class="calibre5">Creator Spirit</i> (San Francisco: Ignatius Press, 1993), pp. 114–15.</p>
<p class="ntull">13  See M. Dodds, ‘St Thomas Aquinas and the Motion of the Motionless God,’ <i class="calibre5">New Blackfriars</i> 86 (1987):238–39 and G. Hanratty, ‘Divine Immutability and Impassibility Revisited’ in <i class="calibre5">At the Heart of the Real</i>, ed. F. O’Rourke (Dublin: Irish Academic Press, 1992), p. 155.</p>
<p class="ntull">14  As we will see, Aquinas argues that God, as <i class="calibre5">ipsum esse</i>, cannot be placed within a genus for he has no substantial quiddity by which to classify him. What Aquinas and the tradition failed to discern is that the persons of the Trinity, as subsistent relations, are also placed outside the order of genus. As relations fully in act, they cannot be classified for they too are signified and designated by verbs. Thus the Trinity itself demands that there be an ontological distinction between itself and all else. The very character of the Trinity specifies its radical mode of transcendence, in that it be wholly other than and so totally distinct from the created order.</p>
<p class="ntull">15  A great deal has been written concerning Aquinas’ notion of God. For example see: D. Burrell, <i class="calibre5">Aquinas: God and Action</i> (London: Routledge &amp; Kegan Paul, 1979); B. Davies, <i class="calibre5">Thinking About God</i> (London: Geoffrey Chapman, 1985); B. Davies, <i class="calibre5">The Thought of Thomas Aquinas</i> (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1992); M. Dodds, <i class="calibre5">The Unchanging God of Love</i> (Fribourg: Editions Universitaires Fribourg Suisse, 1985); E. Gilson, <i class="calibre5">God and Philosophy</i> (New Haven: Yale University Press, 1941); E. Gilson, <i class="calibre5">The Christian Philosophy of St Thomas Aquinas</i> (London: Gollancz, 1957); E.L. Mascall, <i class="calibre5">He Who Is</i> (London: Libra Books, 1966); E.L. Mascall, <i class="calibre5">Existence and Analogy</i> (London: Libra Books, 1966); Owen, <i class="calibre5">Concepts of Deity</i>.</p>
<p class="ntull">16  In the following I am further developing what I wrote in <i class="calibre5">Does God Change?</i>, pp. 74–82.</p>
<p class="ntull">17  <i class="calibre5">De Ente et Essentia</i>, 4, 6. Translation from <i class="calibre5">On Being and Essence</i>, A. Maurer (Toronto: Pontifical Institute of Mediaeval Studies, 1968).</p>
<p class="ntnl">E. Gilson writes: ‘The definition of no empirically given thing is existence; hence its essence is not existence, but existence must be conceived as distinct from it.’ <i class="calibre5">God and Philosophy</i>, p. 71.</p>
<p class="ntull">18  Because <i class="calibre5">esse</i> has no quiddity it cannot be conceptualized by the mind. Being a verb, <i class="calibre5">esse</i> designates action as do all verbs, but here it specifies that act by which a being is and without which it would not be. For Aquinas ‘a being is said to be in as much as it possesses being (<i class="calibre5">esse</i>)’ (XII <i class="calibre5">Metaphysica</i>, lect. I, 2419). Thus <i class="calibre5">esse</i> is the basis of al subsequent actions. See <i class="calibre5">De Potentia</i>, 7, 2, ed. 9, and <i class="calibre5">De Anima</i>, 6.</p>
<p class="ntnl">G. Phelan writes:</p>
<p class="bq1f">Things which ‘have being’ are not ‘just there’ (<i class="calibre5">Dasein</i>) like lumps of static essence, inert, immovable, unprogressive, and unchanging. The act of existence (<i class="calibre5">esse</i>) is not a state, it is an act, the act of all acts, and therefore, must be understood as act and not as any static and definable object of conception. <i class="calibre5">Esse</i> is dynamic impulse, energy, act – the first, the most persistent and enduring of all dynamisms, all energies, all acts. ‘The Existentialism of St Thomas,’ <i class="calibre5">Selected Papers</i>, ed. A.G. Kim (Toronto: Pontifical Institute of Mediaeval Studies, 1967), p. 77.</p>
<p class="ntull">19  See <i class="calibre5">De Veritate</i>, 27, 1; and <i class="calibre5">Super Libros Sententiarum</i>, I, d 13, q 1, a 3.</p>
<p class="ntull">20  Aquinas states: ‘That in which act is present is a potentiality, since act, as such is referred to potentiality. Therefore, in every created substance there is potentiality and act’. <i class="calibre5">Summa Contra Gentiles</i> [hereafter, <i class="calibre5">SCG</i>], II, 53, 3. Trans. <i class="calibre5">On the Truth of the Catholic Faith</i>, eds J. Anderson, A. Pegis, V.J. Bourke, J. O’Neil (Garden City: Image Books, 1955–57). See also <i class="calibre5">De Ente et Essentia</i>, 4, 8.</p>
<p class="ntnl">For a discussion of Aquinas’ distinction between <i class="calibre5">esse</i> and <i class="calibre5">essentia</i> and its importance see D. Burrell, <i class="calibre5">Knowing the Unknowable God</i> (Notre Dame: University Press of Notre Dame, 1986), pp. 19–34; and J.B. Reichmann, ‘Immanently Transcendent and Subsistent Esse: A Comparison,’ <i class="calibre5">The Thomist</i> 38/2 (1974):335–43, and ‘Aquinas, God and Historical Process,’ in <i class="calibre5">Tommaso d’Aquino nel suo settimo centenario</i>, Vol. 9, (Naples: Edizioni Domenicane Italiane, 1978), p. 428.</p>
<p class="ntnl">For a contemporary exposition of the <i class="calibre5">esse-essentia</i> distinction see D. Braine, <i class="calibre5">The Reality of Time and the Existence of God</i>, pp. 138–61.</p>
<p class="ntull">21  Aquinas states:</p>
<p class="bq1f">Whatever belongs to a thing is either caused by the principles of its nature … or comes to it from an extrinsic principle…. Now being itself cannot be caused by the form or quiddity of a thing (by ‘caused’ I mean by an efficient cause) because that thing would then be its own cause and it would bring itself into being, which is impossible. It follows that everything whose being is distinct from its nature must have being from another. <i class="calibre5">De Ente et Essentia</i>, 4, 7. See also <i class="calibre5">ST</i>, I, 3, 4, and <i class="calibre5">SCG</i>, I, 22, 6.</p>
<p class="ntull">22  <i class="calibre5">De Ente et Essentia</i>, 4, 7.</p>
<p class="ntull">23  <i class="calibre5">ST</i>, I, 3, 4. See also I, 3, 1–3. Aquinas’ arguments that God is <i class="calibre5">ipsum esse</i>, as they appear in his early work <i class="calibre5">De Ente et Essentia</i> and the two <i class="calibre5">Summae</i>, could be interpreted as proofs for the existence of God. However, their primary focus, especially in the <i class="calibre5">Summae</i>, seems to be that of establishing what the nature of God is and not that God is. Obviously, if God is <i class="calibre5">ipsum esse</i>, then for Aquinas the question whether God is and the question what God is become one and the same question, but only after they have been treated separately. See <i class="calibre5">SCG</i>, I, 22, 6 and <i class="calibre5">ST</i>, I, 3, 4.</p>
<p class="ntull">24  D. Burrell states that to say God is <i class="calibre5">ipsum esse</i> or <i class="calibre5">actus purus</i> is to say that ‘God’s essence is to exist, more precisely as: “to be God is to be to-be”.’ <i class="calibre5">Aquinas: God and Action</i>, p. 42. See also pp. 115–19. See also his <i class="calibre5">Knowing the Unknowable God</i>, pp. 42–50.</p>
<p class="ntull">25  Aquinas argues that his understanding of God as <i class="calibre5">ipsum esse</i> and <i class="calibre5">actus purus</i> is totally in keeping with the biblical revelation that God is ‘He Who Is’ (Exod. 3:14). ‘He Who Is’ is the most proper name of God ‘For it does not signify form, but simply existence itself. Hence since the existence of God is his essence itself, which can be said of no other, it is clear that among the other names this one specially denotes God, for everything is denominated by its form.’ <i class="calibre5">ST</i>, I, 13, 11. See also <i class="calibre5">SCG</i>, I, 22 and <i class="calibre5">De Potentia</i>, 2, 1. Because God’s name is ‘He Who Is’ and thus specifies that his essence is ‘to be,’ he is unknowable for human beings cannot conceive what pure being is. To know that the proper name of God <i class="calibre5">is to-be</i> (<i class="calibre5">ipsum esse</i>) is different from knowing <i class="calibre5">what</i> to be <i class="calibre5">to-be</i> is or means. Thus Aquinas’ understanding of God is totally in keeping with the biblical understanding. For God in revealing his name as ‘He Who Is,’ has also revealed that he is unknowable. See Burrell, <i class="calibre5">Aquinas: God and Action</i>, p. 42; E. Gilson, <i class="calibre5">The Spirit of Mediaeval Philosophy</i> (London: Sheed and Ward, 1936), chapters 3 and 4; Mascall, <i class="calibre5">Existence and Analogy</i>, pp. 12–15; Murray, <i class="calibre5">The Problem of God</i>, pp. 5–30, 66–76; Reichmann, ‘Aquinas, God and Historical Process,’ pp. 429–31; Reichmann, ‘Immanently Transcendent and Subsistent Esse: A Comparison,’ pp. 344–60.</p>
<p class="ntull">26  <i class="calibre5">De Potentia</i>, 7, 2, ad 9 and <i class="calibre5">ST</i>, I, 4, 1. See also <i class="calibre5">SCG</i>, I, 28.</p>
<p class="ntull">27  <i class="calibre5">ST</i>, I, 9, 1. Aquinas also writes: ‘All motion or mutation, in whatever way it is predicated, results from some potentiality since motion is the act of something existing in potency. Therefore, since God is pure act, having no admixture of potency, there cannot be any change in him.’ I <i class="calibre5">Sent</i>., 8, 3, 1. See also the Papal International Theological Commission’s document, <i class="calibre5">Theology, Christology, Anthropology</i> (1983), II, B, 4.1.</p>
<p class="ntull">28  Dodds, <i class="calibre5">The Unchanging God of Love</i>, p. 227. Dodds footnotes Aquinas <i class="calibre5">De Veritate</i>, 21, 4, ad 7. See also M. Dodds, ‘St Thomas and the Motion of the Motionless God,’ <i class="calibre5">New Blackfriars</i> 68 (1987):233–42, especially 235–38.</p>
<p class="ntull">29  See <i class="calibre5">Church Dogmatics</i> II/1, p. 494.</p>
<p class="ntull">30  <i class="calibre5">The Unchanging God of Love</i>, p. 221. See also 211–15.</p>
<p class="ntull">31  <i class="calibre5">Beyond the New Theism</i>, pp. 245–46. See also pp. 264–65.</p>
<p class="ntull">32  Pp. 78–79.</p>
<p class="ntull">33  For further studies on or arguments on behalf of Aquinas’ notion of divine immutability see: Burrell, <i class="calibre5">Aquinas: God and Action</i>, pp. 15–38; Davies, <i class="calibre5">Thinking About God</i>, pp. 161–65; Davies, <i class="calibre5">The Thought of Thomas Aquinas</i>, pp. 101–63; L.B. Gillon, ‘Dieu Immobile Et Dieu en Mouvement,’ <i class="calibre5">Doctor Communis</i> 29 (1976):135–45; Hanratty, ‘Divine Immutability and Impassibility Revisited’, pp. 148–57; T.J. Kondoleon, ‘The Immutability of God: Some Recent Challenges,’ <i class="calibre5">The New Scholasticism</i> 58/3 (1984):293–315; H. McCabe, <i class="calibre5">God Matters</i> (London: Geoffrey Chapman, 1987), pp. 39–46; Owen, <i class="calibre5">Concepts of Deity</i>, pp. 22–23; S. Sia, ‘The Doctrine of God’s Immutability: Introducing the Modern Debate,’ <i class="calibre5">New Blackfriars</i> 68 (1987):224.</p>
<p class="ntnl">P. Helm places God’s immutability within God’s eternity. See <i class="calibre5">Eternal God: A Study of God Without Time</i> (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1988), especially p. 90. W.E. Mann argues for the immutability of God from his simplicity. See ‘Simplicity and Immutability in God’ in <i class="calibre5">The Concept of God</i>, ed. T.V. Morris (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1987), pp. 253–67.</p>
<p class="ntull">34  <i class="calibre5">ST</i>, I, 20, 1, obj. 1. This is similar to the objections raised against Aquinas and the tradition. If God is not passible, he cannot love.</p>
<p class="ntull">35  See <i class="calibre5">ST</i>, I, 20, 1 and I, 82, 2, ad 1.</p>
<p class="ntull">36  <i class="calibre5">ST</i>, I, 20, 1, ad 1.</p>
<p class="ntull">37  Since this process is the activating of the intellect and the will to desire and obtain a known good as loved, it exemplifies, for Aquinas, an act-potency relationship which therefore marks a change. See <i class="calibre5">ST</i>, I, 82, 3, ad 2.</p>
<p class="ntnl">M. Dodds notes that in human love there is, for Aquinas, both motion and stability (a type of immutability). The human person is moved, and so changed, by the desire to possess the loved known good. However, in possessing what is loved, the lover comes to rest. ‘That ultimate union and rest is found only in the real union of lover and beloved.’ <i class="calibre5">The Unchanging God of Love</i>, p. 279. See also pp. 277–80.</p>
<p class="ntnl">Similarly for human knowledge, as for love, there is ‘motion and stability’ – a searching for the truth and a resting in the possession of it. For Aquinas ‘certainty’ (<i class="calibre5">certitudo</i>) refers to this ‘rest’ – in the union of the knower and the known. I am grateful to W. Fey for pointing this out to me.</p>
<p class="ntull">38  <i class="calibre5">SCG</i>, I, 89, 2. See also I, 89, 1–7. Aquinas further states:</p>
<p class="bq1f">Moreover, every passion of the appetite takes place through some bodily change, for example, the contraction or distension of the heart, or something of the sort. Now, none of this can take place in God, since he is not a body or a power in a body…. There is, therefore, no passion of the appetite in him. ST, I, 89, 3.</p>
<p class="ntull">39  See <i class="calibre5">ST</i>, I, 14, 1–4 and I, 19, 1.</p>
<p class="ntull">40  <i class="calibre5">SCG</i>, I, 90, 1.</p>
<p class="ntull">41  <i class="calibre5">SCG</i>, I, 90, 3.</p>
<p class="ntull">42  <i class="calibre5">ST</i>, I, 20, 1, ad 1. See also <i class="calibre5">SCG</i>, I, 91. D. Braine writes concerning God’s love: ‘Love does not essentially consist in imaginable feelings, but in dispositions and activities of heart and will, wherein something is sought or delighted in.’ <i class="calibre5">The Reality of Time and the Existence of God</i>, p. 133.</p>
<p class="ntull">43  In the <i class="calibre5">Summa Contra Gentiles</i> Aquinas states that ‘there must be love in God according to the act of his will’ (I, 91, 1).</p>
<p class="ntull">44  <i class="calibre5">ST</i>, I, 20, 1, ad 1.</p>
<p class="ntull">45  M. Dodds speaks of ‘the dynamic stillness’ of God’s immutable love. See <i class="calibre5">The Unchanging God of Love</i>, pp. 280–82.</p>
<p class="ntull">46  See <i class="calibre5">ST</i>, I, 14, 5 and I, 20, 2.</p>
<p class="ntull">47  <i class="calibre5">ST</i>, I, 28, 2.</p>
<p class="ntull">48  W. Hill argues that because God is <i class="calibre5">ipsum esse</i> and thus <i class="calibre5">actus purus</i>, his pure dynamism cannot be ‘chaotic, unintelligible, utterly without meaning.’ He concludes that God as pure being must give rise to intentionality and thus knowing himself as truth, and also to love and thus loving himself as good. ‘The import of these intelligible emanations is that they posit <i class="calibre5">relationality</i> at the core of existence.’ He concedes that a trinity of persons cannot be deduced from such ‘an analysis of pure actuality,’ but it ‘can afford to theological reason, working under the light of faith … an a posteriori analogy for talking about the Trinity.’ <i class="calibre5">The Three-Personed God</i>, pp. 261, 263 and 264. Hill gives a good account, something which Aquinas did not do, of the relationship between God being <i class="calibre5">ipsum esse</i> and being a trinity of persons. See pp. 259–68.</p>
<p class="ntnl">While I agree with Hill that pure actuality or pure being does give rise to relationality, I would not want to understand this as implying that the oneness of God as <i class="calibre5">ipsum esse</i> has priority over his being a trinity of persons. Rather I would argue that there is a mutual complementarity between God being pure being and being a trinity of persons. God is a trinity of subsistent relations because he is pure being and he is pure being because he is a trinity of subsistent relations. Neither has ontological precedence or importance. This further grounds the truth that pure being must be absolutely relational and that subsistent relations must be fully in act as pure being. Actually, it is not the one being of God as pure being that makes God one, but rather the oneness of God resides in the inter-relatedness of the three persons. What makes the persons three is the very same thing that makes them one, that is, subsisting as pure relations fully in act in accordance with their being pure being. They only subsist as three distinct subjects in their oneness, and they only exist as one in their specific threeness. See Weinandy, <i class="calibre5">The Father’s Spirit of Sonship</i>, p. 83.</p>
<p class="ntnl">D. Braine appears to have a similar view to my own with regards to the actuality of God and the persons of the Trinity as subsistent relations fully in act. See <i class="calibre5">The Reality of Time and the Existence of God</i>, pp. 162–64.</p>
<p class="ntull">49  <i class="calibre5">Enchiridion Symbolorum</i>, eds H. Denzinger, A. Schönmetzer (Friburgi Brisgoviae: Herder, 36 ed, 1976), 1331, see also 1330. See also the Fourth Lateran Council, Denzinger-Schönmetzer, 804. See also Augustine, <i class="calibre5">De Trinitate</i>, V, 14, 15; Anselm, <i class="calibre5">De Processione Spiritus Sancti</i>, chap. 1.</p>
<p class="ntnl">Aquinas states: ‘Now the creative power of God is common to the whole Trinity; and hence it belongs to the unity of the essence, and not to the distinction of the persons.’ <i class="calibre5">ST</i>, I, 32, 1.</p>
<p class="ntull">50  I could have first examined creation in the light of the Trinity, and this might have been more theologically correct since philosophy must be in accord with revelation. However, I thought it would be best to treat first the philosophical issues since they are more complex, more difficult to grasp, and the most controversial. Having first sorted out the philosophical issues, it would then be easier to perceive and understand the significance of the Trinity within the act of creation.</p>
<p class="ntull">51  I will be summarizing and developing here what I wrote in <i class="calibre5">Does God Change?</i>, pp. 88–96. See also A. Krempel, <i class="calibre5">La Doctrine de la Relation chez Saint Thomas</i> (Paris: J. Vrin, 1952); M. Henninger, <i class="calibre5">Relations: Medieval Theories 1250–1325</i> (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1989), pp. 13–39; and E. Muller, ‘Real Relations and the Divine: Issues in Thomas’s Understanding of God’s Relation to the World,’ <i class="calibre5">Theological Studies</i> 56 (1995):673–95.</p>
<p class="ntnl">W. Pannenberg believes that the notion of relation as applied to God is one of the crucial theological tasks of contemporary theology. He holds that such a notion cannot fall into the pantheism of Spinoza, nor the divine process of Hegel and Whitehead (see <i class="calibre5">Systematic Theology</i>, Vol. 1, p. 367). Hopefully, the following investigation will contribute to the contemporary discussion.</p>
<p class="ntull">52  Real relations can also be founded upon quality or quantity, such as weight or color. While the relation is founded in reality, it need not bring about a change, for example, in what is termed a ‘Cambridge change’ where two terms are newly related because a change takes place in only one of the terms, such as one man being now shorter than another because the other man grew. There is a change in the relationship, but not a change in the man who is now shorter. See P.T. Geach, ‘God’s Relation to the World,’ <i class="calibre5">Sophia</i> 8/2 (1969):1–4. Time and space can also found real relations.</p>
<p class="ntull">53  See <i class="calibre5">ST</i>, I, 13, 7; also I, 28, 1 and <i class="calibre5">De Veritate</i>, 1, 5, ad 16.</p>
<p class="ntull">54  <i class="calibre5">ST</i>, I, 45, 3, ad 1.</p>
<p class="ntull">55  For Aquinas, to create is ‘to produce being absolutely, [and] not as this or that being’ (<i class="calibre5">ST</i>, I, 45, 5). See also I, 45, 4, ad 1 and I, 45, 6.</p>
<p class="ntull">56  See <i class="calibre5">SCG</i>, II, 17, 4; II, 19; and <i class="calibre5">De Potentia</i>, 3, 1. Creation does bring about a change, but the change is not in the creature but simply in that the creature now is and was not. As E. Mascall writes: ‘Creation does indeed “make a difference” to the creature, and the most radical of all differences, since were it not for creation there would be no creature at all; nevertheless, were it not for creation there would be no creature to which the difference could be made.’ <i class="calibre5">Existence and Analogy</i>, p. 145.</p>
<p class="ntnl">While we speak of ‘before creation,’ as if creation brings about a change, we do so only figuratively. This is why one cannot speak literally of ‘before creation’ since there is <i class="calibre5">no-thing</i> before creation to which creation can be before. See <i class="calibre5">ST</i>, I, 45, 1–3; <i class="calibre5">SCG</i>, II, 11; and <i class="calibre5">De Potentia</i>, 3, 1. This is also why creation is <i class="calibre5">ex nihilo</i> since there is <i class="calibre5">no-thing</i> out of which creation can be made. The act of creation is God simply bringing into existence that which never existed. While God brings something into existence and so uses his divine power, creation is not made <i class="calibre5">from</i> his ‘divine substance.’ See also J.F. Anderson, ‘Creation as a Relation,’ <i class="calibre5">New Scholasticism</i> 24 (1950):263–83.</p>
<p class="ntull">57  <i class="calibre5">SCG</i>, II, 18, 2.</p>
<p class="ntull">58  E. Muller correctly states that ‘one can dispense with this relational asymmetry only by rejecting the transcendence of God.’ ‘Real Relations and the Divine,’ <i class="calibre5">Theological Studies</i> 56 (1995):678.</p>
<p class="ntnl">For the complete dependancy of the creature upon the Creator see also R. Neville, <i class="calibre5">God the Creator: On the Transcendence and Presence of God</i> (Chicago: The University of Chicago Press, 1968), pp. 61–119.</p>
<p class="ntull">59  That creation and preservation are one and the same see <i class="calibre5">ST</i>, I, 8, 1; I, 9, 2; I, 104, 1 and <i class="calibre5">De Potentia</i>, 3, 4. D. Braine creatively constructs a ‘proof’ for the existence of God based upon the continuous existence of composite beings. The continuous existence of composite beings existing in time demands an incomposite being existing in himself as pure actuality eternally. See <i class="calibre5">The Reality of Time and the Existence of God</i>. See also D. Bradshaw, ‘“All Existing is the Action of God”: The Philosophical Theology of David Braine,’ <i class="calibre5">The Thomist</i> 60/3 (1996):379–416. See also G. Grisez’s detailed argument for the existence of God based upon contingency (<i class="calibre5">Beyond the New Theism</i>, pp. 36–91, 261–66).</p>
<p class="ntull">60  <i class="calibre5">ST</i>, I, 45, 3 (author’s translation).</p>
<p class="ntull">61  While we must conclude that God acts in the act of creation by no other act than the pure act that he is, we cannot conceive the nature of such an act since it is completely beyond the realm of the created order. As D. Burrell writes: ‘[I]t makes no sense to ask <i class="calibre5">how</i> pure-act acts, since it is <i class="calibre5">ipso facto</i> in act. So God’s acting involves no mechanisms, no process (from potency to act), no <i class="calibre5">powers</i> by which divinity acts.’ ‘Divine Practical Knowing: How an Eternal God Acts in Time’ in <i class="calibre5">Divine Action</i>, pp. 93–94. See also his <i class="calibre5">Freedom and Creation in Three Traditions</i> (Notre Dame: University of Notre Dame Press, 1993), p. 70; R. Sokolowski, <i class="calibre5">The God of Faith and Reason</i> (Notre Dame: University of Notre Dame Press, 1982), p. 33; and T. Tracy, ‘Narrative Theology and the Acts of God’ in <i class="calibre5">Divine Action</i>, eds B. Hebblethwaite and E. Henderson (Edinburgh: T &amp; T Clark, 1990), pp. 177 and 179.</p>
<p class="ntnl">G. Grisez states that the act of creation is ‘unintelligible’ in that it ‘cannot be placed in some familiar category. Creation, being unique, cannot be placed in any of the other modes of causality, and so creation is not intelligible by assimilation to anything else’ (<i class="calibre5">Beyond the New Theism</i>, p. 267). This is an excellent example of knowing <i class="calibre5">what</i> the mystery is but being unable to comprehend the mystery.</p>
<p class="ntnl">It is not possible here to elucidate an entire theory of ‘how’ God acts. However, it would be good to state briefly the notion of God’s action that is presupposed in this study.</p>
<p class="ntnl">Many contemporary theologians argue against what is now termed an ‘interventionist’ view of God acting, that is that God acts in time and history in a manner that is peculiar and singular to himself, and so the action cannot be accounted for by the laws of nature and human freedom. Traditionally understood this would be a denial of God’s ‘supernatural acts.’ that is those acts of God which go beyond what can be accounted for merely from within the created order. Rather, many theologians today argue that God is limited to some generic (not ‘act’ specific) providential will and care, and that this is accomplished solely from within the created order by those who exist within that order. See, for example, M. Wiles, <i class="calibre5">God’s Action in the World</i> (London: SCM, 1986), and ‘Divine Action: Some Moral Considerations.’ in <i class="calibre5">The God Who Acts</i>, ed. T. Tracy (University Park, PA: The Pennsylvania State University Press, 1994), pp. 13–29.</p>
<p class="ntnl">I would argue that God does act in time and history in an ‘interventionist’ or ‘supernatural’ sense. I am thinking of such acts as the making of a covenant with the Jewish people, the Incarnation, the bodily resurrection of Jesus, the action of the Holy Spirit in the work of grace, the sacramental actions, as well as the miracles performed by Jesus during his earthly life and those which occur today. When God acts, as he does in the act of creation, he acts by no other act than the pure act that he is. Thus an action is predicated of God not because he has undergone some change, but because the thing or person acted upon is changed, and the change is such that it cannot be accounted for from within the causality of the created order (the instantaneous changing of water into wine) and/or is beyond the causality of the created order (the bodily resurrection). Now when God acts, he newly or differently relates the thing or person to himself as he is, and it is this new relation which brings about the change in the thing or person so related. In the resurrection, the humanity of Jesus is related to God (the Trinity) so as to be a glorified humanity. In the work of grace the person is related to the Trinity so as to be ‘adopted’ into the very trinitarian life. It is only because God is pure act, and so acts by no other act, that such relations and so changes can take place within the created order. Such an ‘interventionist’ or ‘supernatural’ view of God’s action should not, therefore, be understood in the sense that he acts within the created order as a temporary meddler within that order, as if he becomes another acting member within the created order, performs his intervention, and then leaves having ‘done his thing.’ Since God would be acting as a member of the created order, such a view would demand that he changes in so acting. Rather, the ‘interventionist’ or ‘supernatural’ view of God’s action must be understood as God, who remains ontologically distinct from the created order as the Wholly Other, bringing about a change in the created order by relating a thing or person to himself as the Wholly Other in a new manner. Thus to speak of ‘The intervention of God’ is to designate an effect brought about by God in the created order and not to designate that God himself entered into the created order as another acting member of that order.</p>
<p class="ntnl">On the nature of God’s actions, besides the references given above, see also R.M. Adams, ‘Theodicy and Divine Intervention,’ pp. 32–40; W. Alston, ‘Divine Action: Shadow or Substance?’, pp. 41–62; T. Tracy, ‘Divine Action, Created Causes, and Human Freedom,’ pp. 77–102; and D. Burrell, ‘Divine Action and Human Freedom in the Context of Creation,’ pp. 103–9; all in <i class="calibre5">The God Who Acts?</i>. Also see W. Alston, ‘How to Think About Divine Action’ in <i class="calibre5">Divine Action</i>, pp. 51–71.</p>
<p class="ntull">62  See <i class="calibre5">ST</i>, I, 45, 5; <i class="calibre5">SCG</i>, II, 21; and <i class="calibre5">De Potentia</i>, 3, 4. While Creel presents an ardent and often insightful defense of God’s impassibility, his understanding of the act of creation is so flawed that it undermines the credibility of his entire book. Creel believes that <i class="calibre5">creatio ex nihilo</i> means that God either uses his own being to create others, which would be pantheism, or that God ‘creates out of nothing,’ not even himself, which is an ‘absurdity’. Thus Creel feels compelled to posit an eternally pre-existent uncreated ‘plenum’ which contains all the possibilities that God could create. The absolute is God plus the plenum (<i class="calibre5">Divine Impassibility</i>, pp. 68–69). See pp. 64–79. While such a view is reminiscent of Plato’s world of forms or ideas, it is hardly in conformity with the Judeo-Christian tradition. More to the point there is no sufficient reason to account for the plenum’s existence. Moreover, if God cannot bring it into existence and it ‘contains’ only what could possibly exist, how can one speak of it as ‘something’ that does exist, since in itself, it is ‘nothing.’ The real difficulty is that Creel does not grasp the true meaning of <i class="calibre5">creatio ex nihilo</i>. It does not mean that God creates by using his own being as the ‘stuff’ out of which others are made (pantheism), but that God, as existence itself, simply brings into existence others with their own created act of existence. He needs nothing other than himself to perform this singular act.</p>
<p class="ntull">63  R. Swinburne maintains that for God to be the Creator means that he ‘either himself brings about or makes or permits some other being to bring about … the existence of all things that exist.’ He continues: ‘It would hardly seem to matter for theism if God on occasion permitted some other being to create matter. He would hardly be less worthy of worship if he did. I shall therefore understand the doctrine that God is the Creator of all things as the doctrine that God himself either brings about or makes or permits some other being to bring about the existence of all logically contingent things that exist (i.e. have existed, exist, or will exist), apart from himself.’ <i class="calibre5">The Coherence of Theism: Revised Edition</i>, p. 131. See also pp. 134, 232–33. He imagines, for example, that God could give a human being the power to ‘produce a sixth finger or a new fountain-pen (not made out of pre-existing matter)’ (pp. 142–43). What Swinburne fails to grasp is that God could not permit, even if he wanted to, others, whether they be angels or human beings, to bring things into existence because it is not a matter of just having God’s permission, but a matter of possessing the ability. Only God has the ability to bring things into existence because he is the only one who is existence itself, which the act of creation demands. For God to permit others to create he would not just have to give them a certain amount of power, but a specific kind of power, that is the power that accrues to being pure act as <i class="calibre5">ipsum esse</i>, which is impossible since it would demand that those beings would have to exist in and of themselves as <i class="calibre5">ipsum esse</i> and so be eternally God. Aquinas writes: ‘Because no creature has simply an infinite power, any more than it has an infinite being …, it follows that no creature can create.’ <i class="calibre5">ST</i>, I, 45, 5, ad 3. See the whole of article 5.</p>
<p class="ntnl">D. Braine also argues that God cannot ‘deputize’ the power to create. See <i class="calibre5">The Reality of Time and the Existence of God</i>, pp. 16, 21, 24, 191–96, 345, 349, 352.</p>
<p class="ntull">64  P. Helm rightly points out that only an immutable God can actually do the things the Bible claims that he does. See <i class="calibre5">Eternal God</i>, pp. 21–22.</p>
<p class="ntnl">In treating the question of whether there is power in God, Aquinas distinguishes between passive and active power. Passive power pertains to one’s potential and is ‘the principle of being acted upon by something else.’ In contrast active power pertains to one’s perfection. The more one is in act, the more one can act. Since God is pure act, it ‘most fittingly belongs to him to be an active principle, and in no way whatsoever to be passive.’ Therefore, ‘in God there is active power in the highest degree’ (<i class="calibre5">ST</i>, I, 25, 1 and ad 1). This is in keeping with what we stressed above that God/Trinity possess no self-constituting potential that needs to be actualized in order for them to be more who they are. God as a trinity of persons is fully actualized and so in perfect act. It is this unchanging fully actualized power as pure act that allows God to create.</p>
<p class="ntull">65  <i class="calibre5">ST</i>, I, 8, 1. See also I, 8, 3, ad 1. M. Dodds writes:</p>
<p class="bq1f">As the source of created being, God is most intimately present to each creature. His presence is far more intimate than the sort of presence which is possible for the terms of a mutually real relation among creatures. For in a mutually real relation of cause and effect, the created agent is related to the effect through the medium of the motion which it produces and which is distinct from its essence. God, however, as the cause of <i class="calibre5">esse</i> in creatures, is present to each one by his very essence. And because <i class="calibre5">esse</i> is the innermost actuality of the creature, God is most intimately present to each thing. <i class="calibre5">The Unchanging God of Love</i>, pp. 239–40.</p>
<p class="ntnl">See also Burrell, ‘Divine Practical Knowing’ in <i class="calibre5">Divine Action</i>, pp. 96, 101; Davies, <i class="calibre5">The Thought of Thomas Aquinas</i>, pp. 98–101; L.B. Gillon, ‘Dieu Immobile et Dieu en Mouvement,’ <i class="calibre5">Doctor Communis</i> 29 (1976):139–40; and Reichmann, ‘Immanently Transcendent and Subsistent Esse: A Comparison,’ pp. 339–47.</p>
<p class="ntnl">It should be noted that even pantheism and panentheism fall short of such a close relationship, for in both God is never fully related as he is in himself, by his very being, but always by some lesser expression, either by way of emanation or by some divine spark of his being.</p>
<p class="ntull">66  D. Braine states a similar view, but not, I think, as clearly. See <i class="calibre5">The Reality of Time and the Existence of God</i>, pp. 204–5.</p>
<p class="ntull">67  Aquinas states: ‘God however does not act through a mediating action which is understood as proceeding from God and terminating in the creature. But his action is his substance, and whatever is in it is altogether outside the genus of created being through which the creature is referred to God.’ <i class="calibre5">De Potentia</i>, 7, 9, ad 4.</p>
<p class="ntnl">K. Tanner states that ‘non-divine being must be talked about as always and in every respect <i class="calibre5">constituted</i> by, and therefore <i class="calibre5">nothing apart from</i>, an immediate relation with the founding agency of God.’ <i class="calibre5">God and Creation in Christian Theology</i> (London: Blackwell, 1988), p. 84. See also her ‘Human Freedom, Human Sin, and God the Creator’ in <i class="calibre5">The God Who Acts</i>, pp. 111–35.</p>
<p class="ntnl">D. Braine also emphasizes the immediacy of God’s relationship to creation. ‘He is as immediate to each thing as each thing is to itself, and to its action. It is not that God is all things, but that He is in all things.’ <i class="calibre5">The Reality of Time and the Existence of God</i>, p. 20. See also pp. 24, 105, 189, 286, 304, 338, 347–49, 357–58, 363. He therefore argues that God is not ‘metaphorically’ present to creation, but ‘literally present’ (see pp. 129–33).</p>
<p class="ntnl">See also Burrell, <i class="calibre5">Knowing the Unknowable God</i>, pp. 34, 49, 93–99; and Gillon, ‘Dieu Immobile et Dieu en Mouvement,’ p. 140.</p>
<p class="ntull">68  We can grasp now why the two terms in a mixed relation are in distinct ontological orders. They are in distinct ontological orders because the one term, God, establishes the existence of the other term (the other ontological order), creation. The relation is a kind of ‘subsistent relation’ in that creation only ‘is’ by being totally dependent upon being related to God for its existence. It is not as if both terms existed and then were related through some mediating action. Rather the relationship itself establishes the existence of creation. The relationship is real in the creature for it establishes the creature’s existence. It is logical in God for the creature only comes to be by being related to God as he is in himself.</p>
<p class="ntnl">G. Grisez holds a similar view of the Creator-creature relationship, <i class="calibre5">Beyond the New Theism</i>, pp. 261–66, as does G. Hanratty, ‘Divine Immutability and Impassibility Revisited’ in <i class="calibre5">At the Heart of the Real</i>, pp. 155–57.</p>
<p class="ntull">69  As I argued in my book, <i class="calibre5">Does God Change?</i> (pp. 93–95), there is ambiguity in Aquinas’ exposition of a mixed relation which has caused much confusion and misunderstanding, and so much criticism, especially among those who wish to predicate change in God through his relationships with the created order. Aquinas frequently uses the example of a man being on the right or the left of a column to illustrate a mixed relation (see <i class="calibre5">ST</i>, I, 13, 7; III, 16, 6, ad 2). The relation is real for the man and thus he is changed, but it is logical in the column, and so it is not changed. Moreover, the relation is made in the human mind, and thus the column, in reality, is not truly related. This is really a variation of a ‘Cambridge change’ for the column is only newly related to the man because the man has changed. This is why Aquinas uses this illustration. It is not really an example of a mixed relation, but an illustration of how the logical term of a relation can be related to another term without changing even though the other term does. It illustrates then how God can be related without changing. Nonetheless, it is an ambiguous illustration under the present circumstances. Furthermore, Aquinas consistently states that the relation between the Creator and the creature ‘is not really in God, but only in our way of thinking’ (<i class="calibre5">ST</i>, I, 13, 7). See also III, 2, 7, ad 1; <i class="calibre5">SCG</i>, II, 13, 4; <i class="calibre5">De Veritate</i>, 3, 2, ad 8; and <i class="calibre5">De Potentia</i>, 7, 8–11. If Aquinas means by this that God is not actually related to creatures in reality but only related in our way of thinking, then, as I stated above, no relation exists between God and creatures, and thus God could not actually be the Creator. This is how Aquinas’ critics consistently interpret him. However, the above examination clarifies and demonstrates that this cannot possibly be what Aquinas means. He himself states: ‘It cannot be said, however, that these relations exist as realities outside God’ (<i class="calibre5">SCG</i>, II, 13, 1), and he further gives this interpretation as an objection to his own position (see <i class="calibre5">ST</i>, I, 13, 7, obj. 5 and <i class="calibre5">De Veritate</i>, 3, 2, obj. 8). The point that Aquinas is making is that God is actually related, in reality, to the creature, not because of some change in him, but only because the creature is really related to him as he exists in himself as <i class="calibre5">ipsum esse</i>. It is because the creature is really related to God that we come to understand God in a new way as Creator. Thus God is in reality Creator and is actually related to the creature, but only because the creature is related to him as he is. In discussing the title ‘Lord’ Aquinas writes: ‘Since God is related to the creature for the reason that the creature is related to him; and since the relation is real in the creature, it follows that God is Lord [and thus Creator also] not in idea only but in reality, for he is called Lord according to the manner in which the creature is subject to him.’ <i class="calibre5">ST</i>, I, 13, 7, ad 5. See also <i class="calibre5">SCG</i>, II, 11, 2, and Burrell, <i class="calibre5">Aquinas: God and Action</i>, pp. 84–87. The confusion lies in that Aquinas did not realize how radically he had altered Aristotle’s notion of a mixed relation when treating the Creator–creature relation, something Aristotle never dealt with, and thus he never adequately distinguished between what it means to be a ‘logical term’ within a mutually logical relation and within a mixed relation. In the first the terms are related solely in the human mind. In the latter God, as the logical term, is not related to the creature solely in the human mind, but rather, because the creature is really related to God as he is in himself and not through some mediating action, he is actually related to the creature. God, then, as the logical term is truly understood in a new way, not because he has changed, but because the creature is related to him in a new way as the Creator. What is needed is a new word to express the full truth of being a ‘logical term’ within a mixed relation. I have spoken of it as being an ‘actual relation’ both because it is a relation founded within reality and one founded upon the pure act of God and the act of existence which establishes the creature as existent. Henninger states that Aquinas transforms ‘yet another doctrine of Aristotle, that of the category of relation, in the light of his metaphysics of the act of existence.’ <i class="calibre5">Relations: Medieval Theories</i> 1250–1325, p. 33. See also pp. 34–39.</p>
<p class="ntnl">Because of the confusion contained within Aquinas and because of the criticism leveled against him, many scholars of Thomist background have attempted, in various ways, to clarify, re-interpret, or develop Aquinas’ position. For example see: Burrell, <i class="calibre5">Aquinas: God and Action</i>, pp. 82–7, 135–45; W. Norris Clarke, ‘A New Look at the Immutability of God,’ <i class="calibre5">God Knowable and Unknowable</i>, ed. R.J. Roth (New York: Fordham University Press, 1973), pp. 43–72; W. Norris Clarke, <i class="calibre5">The Philosophical Approach to God: A Neo-Thomistic Perspective</i> (Winston-Salem: Wake Forest University Press, 1979), pp. 66–109; J. Galot, <i class="calibre5">Vers une Nouvelle Christologie</i> (Paris: Duculot-Lethielleux, 1971); Galot, <i class="calibre5">Dieu Souffre-t-il?</i>; Galot, <i class="calibre5">Who Is Christ;</i> Galot, <i class="calibre5">The Person of Christ;</i> Galot, <i class="calibre5">Abba Father;</i> Grisez, <i class="calibre5">Beyond the New Theism</i>, pp. 256–66; W. Hill, ‘Does the World Make a Difference to God?’, <i class="calibre5">The Thomist</i> 38 (1974):146–64; W. Hill, ‘Does God Know the Future? Aquinas and Some Moderns,’ <i class="calibre5">Theological Studies</i> 36 (1975):3–18; W. Hill, ‘In What Sense is God Infinite? A Thomistic Perspective,’ <i class="calibre5">The Thomist</i> 42 (1978):14–27; W. Hill, ‘The Historicity of God,’ <i class="calibre5">Theological Studies</i> 45 (1984):320–33; W. Hill, ‘Does Divine Love Entail Suffering in God?’ in <i class="calibre5">God and Temporality</i>, eds B.L. Clarke and E.T. Long (New York: Paragon House, 1984), pp. 55–71, especially pp. 65–9; A.J. Kelly, ‘God: How Near a Relation?’, <i class="calibre5">The Thomist</i> 34 (1970):191–229; A.J. Kelly, ‘Trinity and Process: Relevance of the Basic Christian Confession of God,’ <i class="calibre5">Theological Studies</i> 30 (1970):393–414; T. Kondoleon, ‘The Immutability of God: Some Recent Challenges,’ <i class="calibre5">The New Scholasticism</i> 58/3 (1984):293–315; E.L. Mascall, <i class="calibre5">Whatever Happened to the Human Mind?</i> (London: SPCK, 1980), pp. 64–96; J.H. Wright, ‘Divine Knowledge and Human Freedom: The God Who Dialogues,’ <i class="calibre5">Theological Studies</i> 38 (1977):450–77.</p>
<p class="ntnl">There is a similar theme in Clarke, Galot, Hill and Wright: while God is ontologically immutable, and therefore cannot be ‘really related’ to the created order, yet he can intentionally be actually and personally related through his knowledge and love. This can be called a ‘real’ relation. What these authors fail to realize is that God’s immutability is not a detriment which must be held in dialectic with his relatedness nor an ‘evil’ that must be overcome in order for God to be ‘actually’ related to the created order: rather, as I have argued, the immutability of God is the primary presupposition for his dynamic and intimate actual relation to the created order. See my <i class="calibre5">Does God Change?</i>, fn. 110, pp. 95–96, 174–86.</p>
<p class="ntull">70  See <i class="calibre5">De Potentia</i>, 7, 3; <i class="calibre5">SCG</i>, I, 25, 5 and I, 25, 9–10; <i class="calibre5">ST</i>, I, 3, 5. E.L. Mascall writes:</p>
<p class="bq1f">We cannot lump together in one genus God and everything else, as if the word ‘being’ applied to them all in precisely the same sense, and then pick out God as the supreme one. For if God is the Supreme Being, in the sense in which Christian theology uses the term, ‘being’ as applied to him is not just one more instance of what ‘being’ means when applied to anything else. So far from being just one item, albeit the supreme one, in a class of being, he is the source from which their being is derived; he is not <i class="calibre5">in</i> their class but <i class="calibre5">above</i> it. <i class="calibre5">He Who Is</i>, p. 9.</p>
<p class="ntnl">That God does not belong to a genus is of the utmost importance for it establishes the radical and irreducible ontological difference between God and all else. It manifests that God is the Wholly Other and gives precision to the nature of God’s transcendence. Unlike the gods of the pagans, or even the God of Aristotle, who were the most perfect being(s) within a continuum of beings, this notion of God as Creator establishes that he is absolutely distinct from all else. R. Sokolowski perceptively refers to this as ‘the Christian distinction’ and sees the preserving of this distinction as fundamental in all theological issues. ‘The Christian understanding of God and the world is not an inert background for more controversial issues; it enters into their formulation and helps determine how they must be decided.’ <i class="calibre5">The God of Faith and Reason</i>, p. 34. See also pp. 12, 15–16, 21–34. See also R. Sokolowski, ‘Creation and Christian Understanding’ in <i class="calibre5">God and Creation: An Ecumenical Symposium</i>, eds D. Burrell and B. McGinn (Notre Dame: University of Notre Dame Press, 1990), pp. 179–81. D. Burrell has also emphasized Sokolowski’s ‘distinction.’ See his <i class="calibre5">Knowing the Unknowable God</i>, pp. 2, 7, 17–18, 46–47, 64–65, 75–79, 89; ‘Divine Practical Knowing: How an Eternal God Acts in Time’ in <i class="calibre5">Divine Action</i>, pp. 93–101; <i class="calibre5">Freedom and Creation</i>, pp. 9, 14, 22, 25, 61, 91, 97, 128, 164–65, 169–71, 174. See also Neville, <i class="calibre5">God the Creator</i>, pp. 94–119.</p>
<p class="ntnl">The reason this ‘distinction’ is of absolute importance for this study is, as we will see, that to make God changeable and passible is to destroy the distinction, and so make God just the most perfect being among many beings. Moreover, and most importantly, to dissolve the distinction is to undermine the dynamic intimacy which God must have with all else, especially with human beings.</p>
<p class="ntull">71  D. Braine correctly emphasizes that the proper understanding of God’s transcendence and immanence is founded upon the act of creation.</p>
<p class="bq1f">What allows God to be immediate to every creature is a mode of existence which makes Him at the same time unlike every creature in nature….We establish in one act [of creation] both the immediacy of God to creature, with their immediacy in respect of dependence on Him for their existence, and the gulf between creatures and God in respect to their manner of existence inasmuch as God is involved in doing something, <i class="calibre5">viz</i>. communicating existence, vigour, life, or actuality, which they are in themselves impotent to do…. Thus, the notion of God’s transcendence in nature and God’s immediacy or immanence are explained in one and the same act. <i class="calibre5">The Reality of Time and the Existence of God</i>, pp. 23, 24, and 349. See also pp. 25, 338, 357, 363.</p>
<p class="bq1f">R. Neville also writes:</p>
<p class="bq1f">The speculative theory of creation <i class="calibre5">ex nihilo</i> is committed to both the extreme transcendence and extreme presence. A theory that lies in between would not be able to say that all depends on the free grace of God. That is, if God were not so transcendent, his creative grace would be necessitated by the world; and if he were not so present, not all of the world would be dependent. Although the speculative arguments given above should be the philosophic reasons for holding our theory, its religious consequences should not be lost on the theologian. <i class="calibre5">God the Creator</i>, p. 119.</p>
<p class="bq1f">J. Quinn also writes:</p>
<p class="bq1f">Transcendence and immanence are not contradictorily but only relatively opposed. Indeed so closely do they comport with one another that in the line of causation God is most immanent in things because he is absolutely transcendent. Immanence does not cancel out but depends on transcendence…. Since God properly causes the existence that we may take as the most radical, the most formal determination or principle in a thing, he is most intimately present, most formally immanent, in the being and operation of all created things. ‘Triune Self-Giving: One Key to the Problem of Suffering,’ <i class="calibre5">The Thomist</i> 44 (1980):182.</p>
<p class="ntnl">W. Hill notes that the common solution to the problem of God’s immanence is to make him less transcendent. This is a false and deceptive solution for in making God less transcendent he immediately becomes less immanent. Hill correctly stresses that it is precisely God’s utter transcendence which allows for his intimate involvement within the world. ‘The ground of God’s immanence then is precisely his transcendence.’ ‘Does Divine Love Entail Suffering in God?’ in <i class="calibre5">God and Temporality</i>, p. 56. See also Mascall, <i class="calibre5">He Who Is</i>, p. 126.</p>
<p class="ntull">72  While I am developing my own thoughts and arguments in this section, I am indebted to B. de Margerie’s work on the Trinity and creation. See his <i class="calibre5">The Christian Trinity in History</i> (Petersham: St Bede’s Publications, 1981), pp. 186–93.</p>
<p class="ntull">73  <i class="calibre5">ST</i>, I, 45, 3, ad 1. See I, 39, 1.</p>
<p class="ntull">74  While the Hebrew scriptures obviously do not speak of God as a Trinity creating the world, yet, in the light of Christian revelation, clues and intimations are present, as the early Fathers were quick to discern. For example, in the opening verses of Genesis, God is seen calling forth his creation through his word, as his breath (spirit) hovers over the water (see Gen. 1:1–3). Psalm 33:6 proclaims: ‘By the word of the L<small class="calibre11">ORD</small> the heavens were made, and all their host by the breath of his mouth.’ That God creates through his word and wisdom see for example: Prov. 8:27–31; Wis. 9:9; Sir. 24:5. This is followed up in the New Testament by God creating through his Word (see In 1:1–2; 1 Cor. 8:6; Col. 1:15–20; Heb. 1:1–3). That the breath/spirit of God in the Hebrew scriptures is the Spirit of life see for example Gen. 2:7, 6:3; Job 33:4, 34:14–15; Ps. 104:27–31; Ezek. 37:7–10. The Holy Spirit, as instrumental in creation, is not as developed in the New Testament as that of the Word, but he is nonetheless seen as the Spirit of life, especially as the agent of new life in Christ (see for example, Jn 3:5–8; Rom. 8; Gal. 4:29).</p>
<p class="ntnl">See Y. Congar, <i class="calibre5">The Word and the Spirit</i> (London: Geoffrey Chapman, 1986), pp. 15–41; de Margerie, <i class="calibre5">The Christian Trinity in History</i>, pp. 3–56; A. Heron, <i class="calibre5">The Holy Spirit</i> (Philadelphia: Westminster Press, 1983), pp. 3–60; J. McIntyre, <i class="calibre5">The Shape of Pneumatology</i> (Edinburgh: T &amp; T Clark, 1997), pp. 29–73.</p>
<p class="ntull">75  <i class="calibre5">ST</i>, I, 45, 6. The Council of Rome (<span class="sm">AD</span> 382) condemned those who deny that the Father created all, visible and invisible, through his Son and Holy Spirit. See Denzinger-Schönmetzer, 171. Likewise, even Augustine wrote: ‘What things the Father does, these also the Son does: The Father made the world, the Son made the world, the Holy Spirit made the world. If three Gods, then three worlds; if one God, the Father, the Son, and the Holy Spirit, then one world was made by the Father, through the Son, in the Holy Spirit’ (<i class="calibre5">In Joannis Evangelium Tractatus</i>, 20, 9).</p>
<p class="ntnl">I would argue as well that only a God who is a trinity of persons could create. If God were a solitary monad existing in complete self-isolation, the ‘thought’ of creating something other than himself could never arise. It would be ontologically impossible for the thought of ‘another’ to arise, for there would be no ontological ground upon which this thought of ‘another’ could arise. Being the sole being that existed, it would be impossible for a single-person God to conceive of anything other than himself. Actually, I do not think it would be possible for a ‘single-person’ God to exist for the very notion of ‘person’ implies relationality. This is why some philosophers would hold that a non-trinitarian ‘personal’ God creates by necessity. He must do so in order to have something to which he can relate. In contrast, the persons of the Trinity are defined entirely by their relations to one another, and are not defined by something that is self-defining which is independent of their mutual relations. Who they are as distinct persons is only established in relation to one another. Only from within this ontological grounding could the idea of creation arise. It is only because the persons of the Trinity eternally gaze upon <i class="calibre5">one another</i> in the fulness of life and love that they could conceive of creating <i class="calibre5">another</i> other than themselves who could share in their life and love. On this and related points see von Balthasar, <i class="calibre5">Theo-Drama V</i>, pp. 61–92.</p>
<p class="ntull">76  See <i class="calibre5">ST</i>, I, 45, 6, ad 2; <i class="calibre5">Super Libros Sententiarum</i>, I, Prologue and I, d 10, q 1, a 1 sol.; and <i class="calibre5">Super Boethium ‘De Trinitate</i>’, Prologue. For an excellent discussion of how Aquinas conceives creation in relation to the distinct persons of the Trinity see the reference to von Balthasar above.</p>
<p class="ntull">77  <i class="calibre5">ST</i>, I, 34, 3.</p>
<p class="ntull">78  This is why Aquinas holds that God’s knowledge is the cause of all things and that his knowledge extends as far as his causality extends. God does not know things apart from his causality but within his causality, for it is through his Word that he equally knows and causes the whole of creation to come to be and to continue to be (see <i class="calibre5">ST</i>, I, 14, 8 and 11). Again this expresses the depth of the Father’s knowledge of creation since he is present to and knows creation by his very Word through whom he creates and in so doing relates creation to himself through his Word and so knows it in his Word.</p>
<p class="ntull">79  <i class="calibre5">ST</i>, I, 37, 2, ad 3.</p>
<p class="ntull">80  See <i class="calibre5">ST</i>, I, 45, 6, obj. 1. This is in keeping with the principle that the Trinity acts outside of itself in a manner consistent with the acts within itself. With regards to revelation the principle is stated that the manner in which the Trinity reveals itself in the economy is in keeping with the manner it is in itself. The economic Trinity is the immanent Trinity.</p>
<p class="ntnl">However, while it is true that the act of creation mirrors the processions within the Trinity, this does not mean that the Trinity is fully revealed and so knowable in the act of creation. Reason alone can only grasp that God created the world, it cannot perceive, without the aid of revelation, its trinitarian implications. This ‘mirroring’ is only discerned in the light of the full revelation of the Trinity.</p>
<p class="ntnl">It should also be noted that while the Trinity-creature relationship is fully relational, dynamic, intimate and enduring, it is such only by way of establishing the existence of the creature as a creature. The human person is related to the Trinity insofar as the human person exists as a creature and so is distinct, but not apart, from the Trinity. It is not a ‘graced’ relationship in the sense that it does not interiorly conform human beings into the likeness of the Son and so transform them into children of the Father through the Holy Spirit. The reason is that in the Trinity-creature relationship the relationship is primarily founded upon the Trinity as the author(s) of existence, and therefore insofar as the Trinity is <i class="calibre5">ipsum esse</i> or <i class="calibre5">actus purus</i>. This is why the act of creation only ‘mirrors’ in an imperfect or secondary manner the processions within the Trinity. In the ‘graced’ relationship, the relationship is primarily founded upon the Trinity as subsistent relations. The human person is related to and taken into the Trinity, not only insofar as the human person exists, but also insofar as the human person now fully shares in and so is interiorly conformed by the mutual relations shared by the divine persons themselves. This is why the ‘graced’ relationship divinizes the human person, for now the human person not only exists in relation to the Trinity as an existing being, but also shares in the life of the Trinity itself as the persons of the Trinity themselves live it. This distinction is made not to denigrate or disparage the Trinity-creature relationship, but to highlight that, even though such a relationship is itself extraordinary, the ‘graced’ relationship is even more relational, dynamic and intimate for now the human person is not related to the Trinity solely as a creature, but adopted into the very life of the Trinity as the persons actually live it themselves.</p>
<p class="ntull">81  <i class="calibre5">ST</i>, I, 37, 2, ad 3.</p>
<p class="ntull">82  <i class="calibre5">ST</i>, I, 32, 1, ad 3. The second reason Aquinas gives is the much more obvious one: ‘and in another way, and chiefly, that we may think rightly concerning the salvation of the human race, accomplished by the Incarnate Son, and by the gift of the Holy Spirit.’ It is interesting that while this is the ‘chief’ reason for the revelation of the Trinity, it also, as we saw above, follows the pattern already established in creation, that is, that creation follows the order of the processions within the Trinity.</p>
<p class="ntull">83  W. Hill writes that Plato’s gods ‘are subjects who act for their own enrichment quite as do other particular existents, even if on a heroic scale.’ ‘Two Gods of Love: Aquinas and Whitehead,’ <i class="calibre5">Listening</i> 14 (1979):254). See also Hill, ‘Does Divine Love Entail Suffering in God?’, p. 58. Equally within Plotinus the universe necessarily emanates out from the One. See Burrell, ‘Creation or Emanation: Two Paradigms of Reason’, pp. 27–37, especially p. 29.</p>
<p class="ntnl">R. Sokolowski writes: ‘Over against this pagan and spontaneous understanding, Christian belief distinguishes the divine and the world in such a way that God could be, in undiminished goodness and greatness, even if everything else were not…. For the pagan the whole is essentially prior to both the divine and the rest of being, but for the Christian the divine could be the whole, even if it is not, since it is meaningful to say, in Christian belief, that God could be all that there is.’ ‘Creation and Christian Understanding’, pp. 182 and 183.</p>
<p class="ntull">84  <i class="calibre5">De Divinis Nominibus</i>, IV, lect. 9 (§409). Translation is from Dodds, <i class="calibre5">The Unchanging God of Love</i>, p. 287. W. Hill states that ‘Divine loving cannot be conceived as an accidental or contingent accretion; it is rather constitutive of God’s very being in its pure actuality and so cannot be thought of as enhancing his own being intrinsically. The sole beneficiaries of such love are creatures loved for their own sakes.’ ‘Two Gods of Love: Aquinas and Whitehead’, p. 256.</p>
<p class="ntnl">R. Sokolowski also states:</p>
<p class="bq1f">Finally, it should be apparent that what seemed like a kind of indifference of God toward the world, in the claim that God is not perfected by creation, is really the condition for a greater generosity and benevolence in creation. If God is not perfected by creating, then he does not create out of any sort of need, and his creating is all the more free and generous. There is no self-interest and no ambiguity in the goodness and benevolence of creation. And the pure generosity of creation tells us about the nature of the giver of this gift. The nature of the action tells us what the agent is like, and along with the generosity of redemption, it establishes the context for our own response in charity, first toward God and then toward others…. Because of the abundance of the life of the Trinity, God becomes even more independent in his nature of any involvement with anything that is not divine. This independence of nature, of course, does not become indifference; rather it defines both creation and redemption as all the more generous and unnecessitated. ‘Creation and Christian Understanding,’ pp. 184 and 186.</p>
<p class="ntnl">G. Grisez refers to God’s unnecessitated loving act of creation as ‘an act of play.’ <i class="calibre5">Beyond the New Theism</i>, p. 271. See also Burrell, <i class="calibre5">Aquinas: God and Action</i>, p. 160, and his <i class="calibre5">Freedom and Creation</i>, p. 96; Dodds, <i class="calibre5">The Unchanging God of Love</i>, pp. 282–87; Gillon, ‘Dieu Immobile et Dieu en Mouvement,’ pp. 141–42; J. Quinn, ‘Triune Self-Giving,’ <i class="calibre5">The Thomist</i> 44 (1980):188; Reichmann, ‘Aquinas, God and Historical Process,’ pp. 434–35; and Sokolowski, <i class="calibre5">The God of Faith and Reason</i>, pp. 12–20.</p>
<p class="ntull">85  Remember that I stated in <a href="09_Chapter02.xhtml" class="calibre3">Chapter 2</a> that to make a mystery of the Christian faith fully comprehensible is a sure sign that one has articulated a heresy. The task of Christian theology is to identify and so articulate more clearly what the mystery is.</p>
</body>
</html>
