<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en-US">
  <head>
    <title>Does God Suffer?</title>
    <link href="../styles/page-template.xpgt" rel="stylesheet" type="application/vnd.adobe-page-template+xml"/>
    <meta content="urn:uuid:e0000000-0000-0000-0000-000004626051" name="Adept.expected.resource"/>
    <meta http-equiv="Content-Type" content="text/html; charset=utf-8"/>
  <link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="../../stylesheet.css"/>
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="../../page_styles.css"/>
</head>
  <body class="calibre">
<p class="cta"><a id="page_147" class="calibre2"></a><a href="06_Contents.xhtml#ch7" id="ch7" class="calibre2">7</a></p>
<p class="cs"><a href="06_Contents.xhtml#ch7" class="calibre2">God’s Love and Human Suffering</a></p>
<p class="pn">In the previous chapter we saw that divine immutability and impassibility, when properly understood, far from implying that God is static, inert and remote, denote that the persons of the Trinity, as the one God, are supremely dynamic in their ability to act and absolutely passionate in their ability to love. This was founded upon and exemplified in the act of creation where an immediate, dynamic, intimate, and enduring relationship is established between God as a trinity of persons and the created order. In the case of human beings this relationship also acquired an inherent personalism.</p>
<p class="in">This chapter will now examine three areas of concern: 1) Sin is the cause of evil and so of human suffering. 2) Sin and human suffering do not cause God to suffer. 3) The relationship between sin as the cause of human suffering and God’s love. The next chapter will treat the suffering of the Son of God within the Incarnation, followed by a chapter on how and why his human suffering is redemptive. The final chapter will then examine human suffering in the light of Jesus’ redemptive suffering.</p>
<p class="sec"><b class="calibre8">Sin and Its Effects</b></p>
<p class="pn">When antiquity, whether within pagan religion and/or philosophical thought, confronted the reality of evil and the suffering that it wrought, it sought a solution primarily from within the ontological constitution of the cosmos. The culprit invariably indicted was ‘matter.’ The world was composed of defective ‘stuff’ at its origin, and humanity suffered the consequences. This is exemplified in the Babylonian creation myths of the <i class="calibre5">Enuma Elish</i> and the <i class="calibre5">Epic of Gilgamesh</i>, as well as in the more sophisticated dualism within the varieties of mystery religions, Gnosticism, and Manichaeism. Within Platonism, which had a great deal of philosophical influence, changeable, and so evil, matter is seen as that which hinders the immutable eternal Ideas or Forms from being properly and fully expressed in this world, and thus unchanging truth cannot be known through this material world but only in the contemplation of the Ideal World. For Plotinus matter holds the lowest and, therefore, meanest place within his emanationist hierarchy of beings. The religious and philosophical tenets of the ancients thus resolved the problem of evil, and the suffering that ensued from it, by positing an ontological dualism – that which is spiritual or immaterial is good and that which is material <a id="page_148" class="calibre3"></a>is evil. Human beings, enmeshed in both, fall prey to the material world of evil and suffering, and so strive to extricate themselves from this world by advancing in the realm of the spiritual.</p>
<p class="in">In contrast, the Judeo-Christian tradition held that the whole of creation is good, including matter, for it was created by the all-good God (see Gen. 1:1–31). There is then no ontological principle inherent within the created order which is the cause of evil. Ontologically the whole of the created order is entirely good.</p>
<p class="in">Within the Judeo-Christian tradition evil, and the suffering that stems from it, is founded upon the misuse of what is ontologically good. In creating human beings in his own image and likeness (see Gen. 1:26–7), God gave to humankind the ability to live and act in a godlike manner, such as to know the truth and to act virtuously.<sup class="calibre6">1</sup> Freedom is essential to this manner of life for freedom is constitutive of virtues, such as love. Love is only love if it is freely given.<sup class="calibre6">2</sup> According to the Genesis account, Adam and Eve misused the good gift of freedom by which, instead of being faithful to God in obedience, they rebelled against him expecting to become gods themselves (see Gen. 3:4–5). It is the free misuse of God’s good gifts that is called sin.<sup class="calibre6">3</sup> Sin, a concept not found within the dualisms <a id="page_149" class="calibre3"></a>of the ancient world, designates moral evil freely committed and not an ontological evil.<sup class="calibre6">4</sup></p>
<p class="in">Moreover, according to the Judeo-Christian tradition, it is sin then which has brought the evil of suffering into the world. This suffering is fourfold as witnessed already in the Genesis account of ‘the Fall.’ First, as we see exemplified in Adam and Eve hiding from God (see Gen. 3:8), humankind’s relationship with God is broken, not on an ontological level for human beings continue to exist, but on a moral level. Because humankind has rendered itself unholy through sin, it can no longer be properly related to the all-good and loving God.<sup class="calibre6">5</sup> In the act of free rebellion humankind has constituted itself as an unrighteous enemy opposed to God. It is not that God has changed. He has not become humankind’s enemy, but rather humankind has changed. It has become God’s enemy.<sup class="calibre6">6</sup> Because the human mind is now infected and the human heart hardened by sin, no longer then can human persons properly or easily know God and experience his love. Equally, human beings, according to the Judeo-Christian tradition, having separated themselves through sin from the God of life, die (see Gen. 3:2–3).<sup class="calibre6">7</sup> The chief cause <a id="page_150" class="calibre3"></a>then of human suffering within the Judeo-Christian tradition lies in the division wrought by sin between God – the author, sustainer and provider of all good – and humankind. Because of sin, humankind has rendered itself incapable of being the full beneficiary of God’s bounty and so suffers its loss.</p>
<p class="in">Second, as exemplified in Adam’s accusation against Eve and in their mutual embarrassment over being naked, as well as in Cain’s murder of Abel, sin has devastated human relationships (see Gen. 3:6–7, 11–12; 4:8). Human beings suffer at the sinful hands of one another. They sin and are sinned against, and sin wreaks havoc upon sinner and victim alike. Greed, hatred, lust, pride, deceitfulness, etc. not only inflict immense suffering upon their victims, but they equally dehumanize the greedy, the avenger, the lustful, the arrogant, and the liar thus causing self-imposed suffering.<sup class="calibre6">8</sup> The litany of past and present atrocities, perpetrated by individuals, nations, and various racial and economic groupings testify to the degradation into which humanity has fallen and the horrendous and hideous suffering spawned by such degradation. No one is immune either from being a perpetrator of sin and so a cause of suffering, or from being a casualty of sin and so a victim of suffering. We are all both – often more so of the first than we care to admit.</p>
<p class="in">Third, within the biblical perspective, sin also affects the whole of God’s good creation. God declared: ‘Cursed is the ground because of you [Adam]’(Gen. 3:17). No longer do Adam and Eve (and their descendants) live in the lush bounty of the Garden of Eden, but now man must toil for food and woman give birth in pain (see Gen. 3:17–19). Not only does the physical order cause its human inhabitants to suffer, but it equally groans for its own liberation from the effects of human sin (see Rom. 8:18–25).<sup class="calibre6">9</sup></p>
<p class="in"><a id="page_151" class="calibre3"></a>Fourth, not only are human beings’ relationships with God, others, and the world devastated by sin creating an environment of suffering, but human beings themselves, through sin, have become morally depraved. Sin has contaminated and infected man’s very nature. While human beings remain ontologically good in that they remain human beings, they are now sinners and are thus predisposed by an inner compulsion to sin. This does not make sin any less serious for, as the whole history of humankind bears witness and as St Paul testifies, human beings have freely enslaved themselves to their sinful passions and drives and so rendered themselves less and less free (see Rom. 6:17, 7:14). Every human being finds his or her personal history told in the words of St Paul:</p>
<p class="bq1">I do not understand my own actions. For I do not do what I want, but I do the very thing I hate…. For I know that nothing good dwells within me, that is, in my flesh. I can will what is right, but I cannot do it. For I do not do the good I want, but the evil I do not want is what I do (Rom. 7:15, 18–19).<sup class="calibre6">10</sup></p>
<p class="in">There is one philosophical conclusion I wish to draw from this brief account of sin and the suffering it entails. Because God created everything good, the nature of everything, along with its ability to act in accordance with what it is, is good. Rocks, in so far as they are rocks, are good. Dogs are good and their ability to act in a ‘dog-like’ manner is good. Human beings are good and their ability to freely perfect themselves physically, intellectually, and morally is good. Evil then, founded upon the reality of sin, is by necessity a privation of good – of some good given to it by God as Creator. Evil, while a reality, is not something then that exists in itself (as within the philosophical ontological dualisms), but <a id="page_152" class="calibre3"></a>is always attached to some good as the corruption of that good.<sup class="calibre6">11</sup> For example, for human beings sight is a good, but blindness, while a reality, is the absence of the good of sight and so the partial corruption of the good of being human. Virtues are positive moral goods which perfect human beings – e.g., courage, kindness, and love. Vices – e.g., cowardice, callousness, and selfishness, while realities, are the absence of these goods and so the partial corruption of the good of being human.<sup class="calibre6">12</sup> What must be grasped is that it is the absence of some good then that is the cause of suffering. Sin, as the source of evil, deprives human beings of the goods proper to being human. It is this deprivation of good which, by necessity, causes suffering. Human beings suffer because, through sin, they are deprived of their proper relationships with God and others. They suffer because the cosmos itself is in some way contaminated by sin. Moreover, sin has corrupted reason and so deprived it of its full intellectual ability to know the truth (including a knowledge of God), and it has corrupted the will and so deprived it of its full freedom to choose the good. Human beings, spiritually, intellectually, morally, physically, and emotionally, suffer from these deprivations.<sup class="calibre6">13</sup></p>
<p class="sec"><b class="calibre8">God Does Not Suffer</b></p>
<p class="pn">It is at this precise juncture that we can now (finally) adequately address the question of whether or not God suffers. As with a jigsaw puzzle all of the relevant and necessary philosophical and theological pieces are now in their proper places so as to link correctly with them the question of <a id="page_153" class="calibre3"></a>God’s suffering and so allowing a precise and accurate answer to be given.</p>
<p class="in">The simple answer to the question: ‘Does God suffer?’ is: No, God in himself as God does not suffer. To say that God does not suffer means not only that he does not feel any physical pain, since he is not corporeal, but also that he does not undergo some passible changes of state whereby he experiences some form of divine emotional agitation, anguish, agony, or distress. God is never in a state of inner <i class="calibre5">angst</i>.<sup class="calibre6">14</sup></p>
<p class="in">All that has been set out in the previous chapter concerning God’s immutable and impassible nature as the one God who is a trinity of persons demands that God be immune from suffering. Nonetheless, following upon the conclusions of the last chapter and from the nature of sin and evil, I want to accentuate two inter-related reasons why God cannot suffer.</p>
<p class="psec"><b class="calibre9"><i class="calibre5">Reason One: The Creator–Creature Distinction</i></b></p>
<p class="pn">First, we must remember that God and all else are in distinct, but not unrelated, ontological orders. This distinction and relation is founded, as we saw, upon God’s act of creation. The act of creation establishes that God is distinct, as Creator, from what is created and so cannot be numbered as one of the things created, and he is equally and simultaneously related, as Creator, to what is created. The act of creation actually brings into existence the created ontological order, and so an order that is by necessity, while related to God, ontologically distinct from God.</p>
<p class="in">Moreover, because God is perfectly good and the source of all good, he could not create what is ontologically evil, but only what is ontologically good. ‘To be’ is ‘to be good’ for existence in itself is good. Nor then could God do anything that is evil which would cause himself or others to suffer. Thus, evil, for it to exist, must be caused by sin, a free misuse of what is good, and so evil is a deprivation of good. It is this deprivation which causes suffering.</p>
<p class="in">The conclusion to be drawn is that, because the source of evil (and so suffering) is located not in the ontological constitution of ‘things’ – that is, not insofar as they are created and so exist in relation to God as the Creator, but rather in the free sinful misuse of the goods endowed to human beings as created – evil is contained within and confined to the created order. While God keeps the created order in existence, he is not of the created order in which sin and suffering take place. As Creator he is related to the created order as the one who is not of the created order. Thus evil does not and cannot reverberate back into the uncreated order where God alone exists as absolutely good. The ontological distinction between God and the created order, a distinction which establishes the <a id="page_154" class="calibre3"></a>existence of the created order and so its ontological goodness, prevents God from being infected by the evil that takes place within the created order, and so renders him immune to suffering. The ontological distinction between Creator and creatures is, therefore, the fundamental positive reason for why God does not suffer.</p>
<p class="in">In the light of this, what would be the repercussions if God did suffer? Are there disqualifying reasons for not allowing God to suffer? If God suffered, this would demand that something other than himself caused him to suffer, that is, that the evil of human sin would not only affect humankind causing it to suffer, but that it would also affect God causing him to suffer. At first sight this might appear to be good since, as all those who propose a suffering God argue, it would appear to allow God to share lovingly and compassionately in our suffering and grief. However, such divine suffering would demand that God and all else exist in the same ontological order, for only if he existed in the same ontological order in which the evil took place could he then suffer. This also might appear to be good. Again, many if not most, theologians who argue for a suffering God (process theologians and Moltmann being the prime, but not exclusive, examples) readily admit, and rightly so (and those who do not miss the logic of their stance), that their theodicy is panentheistic.<sup class="calibre6">15</sup> Since panentheism holds that, while God’s being is more than all else and is not exhausted by all else, his being includes all else, these theologians clearly perceive that if God is to suffer he must share in the same ontological order as everything else.<sup class="calibre6">16</sup> However, to place God and all else in the same ontological order has disastrous philosophical and theological consequences.</p>
<p class="in"><a id="page_155" class="calibre3"></a>First, the act of creation (<i class="calibre5">creatio ex nihilo</i>) is rendered impossible since God is now numbered among the things ‘created.’ This is why many theologians who argue for divine suffering are either ambiguous about the act of creation or willingly opt, by philosophical necessity, for some form of eternal ontological monism, process thought again being the principal, but not exclusive, example of this.<sup class="calibre6">17</sup> Process theology sees the entire ontological cosmic process, which contains God himself, not as something brought into existence but simply as having no beginning nor end. Thus, the question why anything actually exists, including God, is left unanswered. Like the ancients’ pre-existent matter, the whole monistic system is now just taken as ‘a given,’ but ‘a given’ that cries out that it cannot be taken as ‘a given’ but demands a reasonable philosophical explanation.<sup class="calibre6">18</sup></p>
<p class="in">Moreover, to say that God and all else are in the same ontological order, and thus that God suffers along with everything else, demands that evil becomes once more ontological in nature as in the ancient religious and philosophical dualisms. Since the whole ontological order is infected with evil so that everything within it suffers, including God, then merely to exist within that order is to exist in an evil ontological state. Within Christianity one is born into a state of original sin whereby one’s existential or ontological goodness is only morally impaired. To be <a id="page_156" class="calibre3"></a>born into a panentheistic or monistic system infected by evil means that one is ontologically impaired. Just ‘to be’ is, at least in part, ‘to be evil,’ and so to suffer. Again, process theologians readily admit this.<sup class="calibre6">19</sup> Evil, and <a id="page_157" class="calibre3"></a>so suffering, is constitutive of the eternal process of ‘becoming’ whereby everything may be becoming ‘better’ (logically everything could be becoming worse) but is never actually able to obtain perfection, and so evil and suffering will never be wholly eradicated. But if the whole ontological system, which includes God, is impaired by evil, then there is no one, including God, who can repair it and make it right. Salvation – freedom from evil and suffering – becomes a false hope for it will never be obtained.<sup class="calibre6">20</sup> The consequences of a suffering God are dire indeed.</p>
<p class="psec"><b class="calibre9"><i class="calibre5">Reason Two: The Perfection of God as a Trinity of Persons</i></b></p>
<p class="pn">There is also a second related positive reason why God cannot suffer. Because evil, due to the reality of sin, is a privation of some good or perfection which in turn causes suffering, God as pure act, and thus pure goodness itself in act, can never be deprived of a good or perfection which would cause him to suffer. Since God is pure good in perfect act, nothing can impair God’s goodness so as to inflict a loss of some good which would then entail God suffering.<sup class="calibre6">21</sup> Negatively, if God <a id="page_158" class="calibre3"></a>did suffer, it would mean that he was deprived of a good, but if he were deprived of a good, he would not be fully in act, for he would now be in potency to obtaining or re-obtaining the good, and if he were not fully in act, as <i class="calibre5">ipsum esse</i>, then he could not create, and if he could not create, then he could not possess the absolutely immediate, supremely dynamic, utterly intimate, and unbreakably enduring relationship with creation and with human persons that the act of creation establishes.</p>
<p class="in">A similar argument applies equally to God as a trinity. Because the persons of the Trinity are subsistent relations fully in act, and so are ontologically the one God in their mutual, reciprocal, and perfect love and goodness, they cannot be deprived of this perfect fully actualized love and goodness. Moreover, as we saw in the previous chapter, for the persons of the Trinity to be subsistent relations fully in act means that they possess the singular ability, complementary to being <i class="calibre5">actus purus</i>, to relate, in the act of creation, creatures to themselves as they are in their mutual and reciprocal love and goodness, and thus in an immediate, dynamic, intimate and unbreakable manner. Negatively, if the persons of the Trinity were infected with suffering, it would mean that they were deprived of some good, and so enmeshed in sin and evil. Thus they would no longer be subsistent relations fully in act possessing fully actualized love and goodness, but would now be in potency to obtaining or re-obtaining the good they did not possess. However, this loss would render them impotent to create, and thus to relate creatures to themselves in the fulness of their love and goodness in an immediate, dynamic, intimate, and unbreakable manner.</p>
<p class="in">While a suffering God may have some intellectual and emotional appeal (often more emotional than intellectual), such an understanding of God is philosophically and theologically disastrous in its consequences. It may give the appearance of providing consolation to the innocent victims of sin and evil, but ultimately it throws into complete disarray the whole philosophical and theological structure upon which an authentic biblical understanding of God and of his loving relationship to creation and to humankind is based.<sup class="calibre6">22</sup> Thus, one must conclude that a suffering God is not only philosophically and theologically untenable; the concept is also religiously devastating, for it is at least emotionally disheartening if not actually abhorrent.<sup class="calibre6">23</sup></p>
<p class="sec"><a id="page_159" class="calibre2"></a><b class="calibre8">The God of Love</b></p>
<p class="pn">Having argued that God does not suffer, I obviously do not want in any way to reject or even to diminish the truth that God is a God of love. Actually, I want to contend, as I have throughout, that a God who does not suffer is more loving, compassionate, and merciful than a God who does.</p>
<p class="in">The whole Bible proclaims and the entire Christian tradition teaches that God is loving, compassionate, and merciful. We saw previously in the chapter on God in the Old Testament that Yahweh reveals himself to be a God of compassion, love, mercy, and forgiveness (see Exod. 34:6–7). The First Letter of John simply states that ‘God is love’ (4:8 and 16). Jesus counsels his disciples that, if they are to be perfect, they must ‘Be merciful, just as your Father is merciful’ (Lk 6:36). But how can a God who does not suffer be compassionate and merciful? Does not, as so many claim, the absence of suffering render God indifferent to evil and the immense suffering that arises from it? Does God not grieve over sin and the injustice perpetrated upon the innocent? If God does not suffer, is he not absent from the Auschwitzes of history? In order to address such legitimate questions and authentic concerns, we must first briefly examine the character of compassionate love among human persons and then discern from this the nature of God’s compassionate love.</p>
<p class="in">The bond of human friendship is love, the giving of ourselves to one another, not for our own good (although we may benefit as well), but for the other’s good.<sup class="calibre6">24</sup> Within the present ‘fallen’ condition human beings attempt to live out and express this altruistic love within a milieu of sin and evil. This means that complete love is rarely achieved for human love is often marred by sinful selfish desires and ends. In relationships we seek not only the good of the other but frequently our own. Moreover, and more importantly for our present discussion, love is expressed in situations where, due to sin and evil, suffering is present. Love, in the midst of personal sin and the evil caused by sin, must risk suffering. Actually, love is often tested, fostered, and most fully expressed in the midst of suffering. We grow in love and manifest the full extent of our love by our willingness to suffer with and on behalf of the person we love. We suffer when someone we love is sick or dying. We suffer in love over the injustice perpetrated against the innocent, and we risk our own well-being when we stand against such injustice. It is this willingness to take action against the evil that is the cause of suffering and so restore the good that manifests most fully one’s love. Moreover, when the person we love injures us by sinning against us, we are even willing, or should be willing, to suffer because of the person we love.</p>
<p class="in"><a id="page_160" class="calibre3"></a>Two points can be drawn from this brief analysis of human love. First, love is defined by and manifested in the giving of ourselves – in thought, word, and deed – for the good and well-being of another. Second, while love in the present world of sin and evil entails the willingness to suffer and is most fully manifested in suffering, suffering itself is not a constitutive element of love. To do away with sin and evil, and thus suffering, would not in any way do away with nor lessen love.<sup class="calibre6">25</sup> The reason is that love is a good in itself. Suffering is not a good in itself, but rather an evil. It is not a good in itself for suffering is always caused by the absence of some good, and suffering love is always caused by the absence of some good that the one we love (even if the one we love is ourselves) should possess – health, justice, etc. Suffering then, as evil, is never sought for its own sake, and if it is, it is rightly seen as an aberration. Suffering is an evil even when attached to the good of love, for love rightly cries out in suffering at the absence or loss of some good, and seeks, if possible, to restore it. The reason human beings willingly suffer is for the good of love and so the suffering entailed in love is seen as good, but it is precisely the love that is good and not the suffering itself.<sup class="calibre6">26</sup></p>
<p class="in">We have previously argued that God cannot suffer because he cannot be deprived of any aspect of his fully actualized goodness which would cause him to suffer. Moreover, since suffering is not constitutive of love, we can also perceive why the absence of suffering in God does not necessarily imply the absence of love and thus divine indifference. Actually, since God does not suffer, his love becomes absolutely free in its expression and supremely pure in its purpose. If God did suffer, it would mean that God would need not only to alleviate the suffering of others, but also his own suffering, and thus there would be an inbuilt self-interest in God’s love and consolation. However, since God does not suffer, his care for those who do suffer is freely given and not evoked by some need on his part.<sup class="calibre6">27</sup> His love is freely expressed entirely for the sake <a id="page_161" class="calibre3"></a>of those he loves. For Aquinas, moreover, what God does to alleviate suffering is done solely for the good and benefit of those suffering and not his own.<sup class="calibre6">28</sup> But if God’s love does not involve suffering, what is the relationship between the suffering encountered by human beings and the love of God?</p>
<p class="in">Again we must first recall that God as pure act and, correlatively, the trinity of persons as subsistent relations fully in act means that the divine attribute of love is fully in act. The trinity of persons subsist in relation to one another, as the one God, with their love for one another fully and completely actualized. They are immutable and impassible in their love for one another, not because their love is static or inert, but because it is utterly dynamic and totally passionate in its self-giving. It is impossible for the Trinity to be more loving for the persons of the Trinity possess no self-actualizing potential to become more loving. This is not only in keeping with the biblical proclamation that ‘God is love,’ but it actually gives to it befitting, exact, and even literal philosophical and theological depth. God ‘<i class="calibre5">is</i>’ love because God’s love, as reciprocally expressed within the Trinity, is fully in act.<sup class="calibre6">29</sup> Two extraordinary and marvellous conclusions <a id="page_162" class="calibre3"></a>can be drawn from this which bear upon God’s love and human suffering.</p>
<p class="in">First, God as a trinity of persons, in their love for human beings, never needs to actualize some aspect of love in order to become more loving.<sup class="calibre6">30</sup> God’s love possesses, as does human love, many different facets and expressions. His love embraces goodness, commitment, affection, joy, kindness, generosity, strength, courage, power, and passion (see 1 Cor. 13:4–7). Because sin affects human beings and their relationship to him, God’s love, as does human love, also embraces mercy, compassion, patience, forgiveness and even sorrow and grief. At times it equally, again as does human love, entails justice, anger, admonition, correction, rebuke, and even condemnation. Within human beings all these various aspects of love are actualized at various times under various circumstances, and so human beings express compassionate love at one time and admonish in love at another. The various aspects of love are never in contradiction to one another, but they are actualized at disparate times depending upon which aspect of love is appropriate given the circumstances. In his relationship to the created order and to human beings in particular, because God’s love is fully in act, he need not actualize, depending upon the changing situations and circumstances, these various facets of love. All of these facets of love are fully actualized and wholly contained within the one fully actualized love of God as a trinity of persons. When a human person repents of sin, God need not change the manner of his love within himself from being that of an admonishing love to that of being a forgiving love. When an innocent person suffers an injustice, God need not adapt himself so as to express compassionate love toward the person so injured and simultaneously adapt his love so as to reprove the perpetrator of the injustice. Eternally God is immutably and impassibly adapted to every situation and circumstance, not because his love is indifferent and unresponsive, but because his love, with all its facets, is fully in act, and so he is supremely and utterly responsive to every situation and circumstance. God is unconditionally adaptable in <a id="page_163" class="calibre3"></a>his dynamic and passionate love because his love is immutably and impassibly in act.<sup class="calibre6">31</sup> If God did need, sequentially in a potency/act manner, to adapt and re-adapt and re-adapt himself again to every personal situation in every momentary instance, he would be conceived as an infinite mega-computer (PC, obviously, and user-friendly) continuously and simultaneously processing trillions of conflicting bits of emotional data. He would then be seen to be perpetually entangled in an unending internal emotional whirligig.<sup class="calibre6">32</sup></p>
<p class="in">Correlatively, because all of the facets of God’s love are fully actualized within the love of God, human persons are able to know in faith, and even experience, that love in accordance with their personal situation at any one time. If a person sins, he or she knows and experiences God’s love as a rebuke and as an admonishment. If the person repents, he or she knows and experiences God’s love as compassionate and forgiving, and <a id="page_164" class="calibre3"></a>so rejoices in his merciful love.<sup class="calibre6">33</sup> If a person suffers due to injustice, he or she knows, in faith and sometimes by experience, that God’s lovingkindness and consolation are present. God’s love as fully actualized is ‘ready made’ to meet any situation, and human beings are able to know and experience this love in all its varied actualized fulness.</p>
<p class="in">Therefore, not only are joy, kindness, and generosity truly contained within the fully actualized love of God, but also compassion, mercy, grief, and even anger are also truly subsumed within his perfect love.<sup class="calibre6">34</sup> Aquinas states that ‘God takes pity (<i class="calibre5">miseretur</i>) on us through love alone, in as much as he loves us as belonging to himself (<i class="calibre5">tanquam aliud sui</i>).’<sup class="calibre6">35</sup> While some facets of love within human beings entail suffering, such as compassion and grief, they are subsumed and contained within the perfectly actualized love of God, but now devoid of the suffering which would render his love less than perfectly actualized. While compassion is defined as ‘suffering with,’ the heart of compassion is the love expressed within the suffering and not the suffering itself. Thus God is perfectly compassionate not because he ‘suffers with’ those who suffer, but because his love fully and freely embraces those who suffer. What human beings cry out for in their suffering is not a God who suffers, but a God who loves wholly and completely, something a suffering God could not do.<sup class="calibre6">36</sup></p>
<p class="in">While such facets of love as compassion, mercy, grief, and sorrow are ascribed to God, in one sense, metaphorically, in so far as they predicate within human beings changeable and passible emotional states as well as suffering, yet they are truly and really facets of God’s fully actualized love and are experienced as such by human beings. God truly grieves over sin and actually is sorrowful over injustice not because he has lost some good (which would imply a self-centred grief and sorrow) and so <a id="page_165" class="calibre3"></a>suffers, but rather because, in his love, he knows that the one he loves is suffering due to the absence of some good. Sadness and grief do not spring from or manifest suffering within God, but rather they spring from, manifest and express the fulness of his completely altruistic, allconsuming and perfect love for his creatures.</p>
<p class="in">Aquinas consistently states that such things as anger, sadness and mercy are predicated of God metaphorically.<sup class="calibre6">37</sup> With regards to mercy Aquinas states:</p>
<p class="bq1">Mercy is especially to be attributed to God, as seen in its effects, but not as an affection of passion. In proof of which it must be considered that a person is said to be merciful (<i class="calibre5">misericors</i>), as being, so to speak, sorrowful at heart (<i class="calibre5">miserum cor</i>); being affected with sorrow at the misery of another as though it were his own. Hence it follows that he endeavours to dispel the misery of this other as if it were his; and this is the effect of mercy. To sorrow, therefore, over the misery of others belongs not to God; but it does most properly belong to him to dispel that misery, whatever be the defect we call by that name. Now defects are not removed, except by the perfection of some kind of goodness; and the primary source of goodness is God.<sup class="calibre6">38</sup></p>
<p class="in">While Aquinas wants to uphold that God is merciful, he does not want his mercy to be seen as a passion, that is as an emotional change of state within God, and one moreover, that implies an evil since evil can in no way reside in God.<sup class="calibre6">39</sup> Thus Aquinas limits the mercy of God to his ability to dispel the effects of evil and to restore the good. I do not wish to deny any of what Aquinas here proposes. However, what Aquinas may fail to appreciate is that mercy arises out of the reality of God’s love and so, while not a negative passion, gives expression to the reality of God’s passionate love. Thus God may not sorrow over the misery of others in the sense that he experiences a negative passible state due to his own suffering, yet it can reside in God, and reside in him in a more perfect state, because of the lack of suffering, as a positive facet of his perfectly actualized, and so completely altruistic, love.<sup class="calibre6">40</sup></p>
<p class="in">In the <i class="calibre5">Summa Contra Gentiles</i> Aquinas would seem to agree. Here he states that love and joy are said properly of God, but that some affections, attributed to him in scripture, are metaphorical ‘because of a likeness either in effects or in some preceding affection,’ sadness being one of them.<sup class="calibre6">41</sup> However, Aquinas holds that sadness proceeds from the affection of love, and ‘God, then is said to be saddened in so far as certain things take place that are contrary to what he loves and approves; just as we experience sadness over things that have taken place against our will.’<sup class="calibre6">42</sup></p>
<p class="in"><a id="page_166" class="calibre3"></a>Likewise, Aquinas does not wish to attribute anger to God in so far as it is a passion, in that human sin cannot deprive God himself of something that would cause anger at such a loss, but in so far as a person injures himself or another through sin, this ‘injury redounds to God, in as much as the person injured is an object of God’s providence and protection.’<sup class="calibre6">43</sup> Here we see that sadness, and even anger, are realities within God, not as passible emotional states (and so are predicated, in this sense, metaphorically of God), but as subsumed within the reality of God’s providential love. But it is this love that bears upon the reality and truth of God’s anger, mercy, and sadness. This notion then of God’s fully actualized love as containing all the various facets and expressions of love provides theological depth and philosophical precision to the patristic understanding which equally subsumed God’s anger under the rubric of God’s love.</p>
<p class="in">While J. Maritain maintains that God does not suffer, he also wishes to uphold the realism of God’s compassion and mercy within his perfect love. It is not solely or simply metaphorical when applied to God. Commenting on Aquinas’ statement that God’s mercy is seen in its effects and not as a passion, he writes:</p>
<p class="bq1l">L’amour n’est pas seulement attribué à Dieu parce qu’il est cause du bien dans les ètres, <i class="calibre5">creans et infundens bonum in rebus</i>. L’amour, non pas seulement selon ce qu’il fait, mais selon ce qu’il est, est une perfection de Dieu, et est Dieu même.</p>
<p class="bqf">N’en va-t-il pas de même de la miséricorde? Dieu est Pitié comme il est Amour et parce qu’il est Amour. Ne devrait-on donc pas dire de la miséricorde qu’elle se trouve en Dieu selon ce qu’elle est, et non pas seulement selon ce qu’elle fait, mais à l’état de perfection <i class="calibre5">pour laquelle il n’y a pas de nom</i>: gloire ou splendeur innominée, n’impliquant aucune imperfection, à la différence de ce que nous appelons la souffrance ou la tristesse, et pour laquelle nous n’avons aucune idée, aucun concept, aucun nom qui soit applicable en propre à Dieu. C’est seulement en raison de l’effet produit par elle, oui, que pour la miséricorde il y a dans notre bagage un concept et un nom applicables en propre à Dieu, mais ça ne veut pas dire que nous devions en rester là. Dans l’infinité de perfection, qui, derrière les concepts par où nous connaissons en propre les perfections de Dieu, reste encore <i class="calibre5">quelque chose d’innominé et d’innominable</i>, d’inconnaissable en propre par aucun de nos concepts, doit exister la splendeur innominée à quoi correspond, non seulement quant à son effet mais quant à son essence, ce que la miséricorde est en nous. Que dire alors, sinon qu’il s’agit là de la perfection, irreprésentable en propre par aucun de nos concepts, dont, en Celui qui nous a faits et qui nous aime, ce qui selon son consitutif propre s’appelle miséricorde en nous (le <i class="calibre5">passionis affectus</i> si bien marqué par l’expression biblique <i class="calibre5">viscera misericordiae</i>) est un reflet ou une participation mais scellée dans notre imperfection quant à sa notion même, et qui nous laisse aveugles lorsque nous <a id="page_167" class="calibre3"></a>cherchons à discerner, sinon métaphoriquement, ce que son exemplaire est en Dieu?<sup class="calibre6">44</sup></p>
<p class="in">There is one further important aspect of God’s love that bears directly upon his compassion and mercy. We have already noted that Aquinas is insistent that God’s mercy and compassion ‘is seen in its effect, but not as an affection of passion.’<sup class="calibre6">45</sup> This means that while mercy cannot be attributed to God in so far as it is a passible emotional state as in human beings, it can properly be attributed to him in so far as his love moves him to dispel the evil which is the cause of suffering. It is in the dispelling of the evil and so the suffering that God properly manifests his compassion and mercy.<sup class="calibre6">46</sup> Thus God’s compassion and mercy is of far greater consequence than human compassion and mercy. We may suffer in love with those who are suffering, but often we are incapable of relieving the evil that is causing the suffering.<sup class="calibre6">47</sup> This is not the case with God. Because God is ontologically distinct from the created order, and thus is not entrapped within the evil and suffering contained within that order, and because his goodness and love are fully actualized, he is able to act compassionately within the created order so as to dispel the evil and suffering within it. Aquinas holds that mercy can be seen as the greatest virtue for ‘it belongs to mercy to be bountiful to others.’ Moreover, ‘to succour others in their want … pertains chiefly to one who stands above. Hence mercy is accounted as being proper to God: and therein his omnipotence is declared to be chiefly manifested.’<sup class="calibre6">48</sup> God’s <a id="page_168" class="calibre3"></a>mercy is most fully manifested by his dispelling evil and in his restoring good through his almighty power.<sup class="calibre6">49</sup></p>
<p class="in">This understanding of God’s love as fully actualized in all its various facets brings a new realism and intensity to his love that often appeared to be, or actually was, lacking within the Christian tradition. All aspects of love are truly and really actualized within the perfect actualized love of God. Thus, in accordance with the biblical proclamation, God, as the Wholly Other, is present to and active within the created order as the Wholly Other – in the fulness of his wholly-other love – without losing his complete otherness, and so his wholly-other love, in so doing. Or, to put it another way, emphasizing this time God’s love, it can be stated that, since God’s love is immutably and perfectly actualized in his total otherness, God’s wholly-other love is present to and active within the created order in all its wholly fully actualized otherness without losing its wholly fully actualized otherness in so doing. If God’s love was not fully actualized, in all of its various facets, within his total otherness, then it would mean that his love would not be present to and active within the created order in all its total otherness, but only in some mediated and, thus, lesser manner. The absence of suffering in God, therefore, not only preserves the wholly otherness of God, but it also simultaneously preserves the full reality of his wholly-other love, and it does so not solely for his own sake, but also for the sake of the created order, particularly and especially for the sake of human beings.</p>
<p class="sec"><b class="calibre8">The Suffering of God</b></p>
<p class="pn">Before concluding, there is one question that could be raised. Having argued that grief and sorrow can be truly predicated of God, is it possible, in a similar manner, to predicate suffering of God? Could ‘suffering’ be considered as a facet or aspect of God’s fully actualized love and goodness? I am very reluctant to say ‘yes,’ since ‘suffering’ when applied to God has traditionally meant, especially now within the contemporary theological context (and as it has been used throughout this study and will continue to be used after this section), that God undergoes some passible change of state and that, as a consequence, he experiences some inner emotional distress or anguish. Moreover, suffering normally implies that some event outside of God has caused him to suffer. All of this I deny. If one did predicate suffering to God, it would need to be in a manner radically different from the way it has been and is presently understood, and indeed it would have to be done along the lines that I have treated divine sorrow and grief.</p>
<p class="in"><a id="page_169" class="calibre3"></a>Sorrow and grief are attributed to God not by way of predicating a passible emotional change within him, but rather by way of denoting that he is all-loving and good. Because he is perfectly loving and good, he finds sin and evil repugnant, and so he can be said to sorrow and grieve in the light of their presence. God does not grieve or sorrow because he himself experiences some injury or the loss of some good, nor that he has been affected, within his inner being, by some evil outside cause, but rather he grieves or sorrows only in the sense that he knows that human persons experience some injury or the loss of some good, and so embraces them in love. This sorrow and grief ascribed to God could contain the note of suffering only if we mean that, as all-loving, he is intensely concerned with the reality of sin and evil, and the suffering that ensues from them. To ascribe suffering to God is not to denote a positive passible emotional state as if such a state were distinct from a variety of other emotional states within God, but solely to specify the truth that God, as all-loving and good, is opposed to and finds abhorrent all that is not loving and good. To ascribe suffering to God does not then imply that God experiences inner emotional anguish or distress because he has experienced some injury or the loss of some good, nor that he has been adversely affected by some evil outside cause, but rather it accentuates the truth that God’s perfectly actualized goodness is wholly adverse to all that is contrary to his goodness, and that in his perfectly actualized love he embraces those who suffer because of sin and evil. ‘Suffering’ would then be attributed to God metaphorically since it has been purged of the passible and emotional connotations found within human suffering, but it would retain and might intensify the authentic truth that God, in his goodness, abhors evil and so repudiates it, and in his love, embraces the sufferer. The innocent who suffer injustice know then that God, in his goodness, is adverse to the injustice suffered, and experience God’s love as a love that is deeply concerned and consoling. As a way of expressing God’s repudiation of evil and as a way of accentuating his loving care for the sufferer God could then be said ‘to suffer in love,’ but God could not be said ‘to suffer in love’ in the sense that he himself experiences some form of inner anguish or distress due to some personal injury or the loss of some good.<sup class="calibre6">50</sup></p>
<p class="in"><a id="page_170" class="calibre3"></a>However, having attempted to clarify in what sense God could be said to suffer, I believe that because suffering, both within the present cultural and theological milieu and within the very nature of human suffering itself, inevitably entails the notion of passible emotional states involving pain, distress and anguish, it would be better, for the sake of clarity and consistency, not to predicate suffering of God at all. To say that God suffers, even in my very restricted sense would, I fear, inevitably cause confusion and misunderstanding, for the experience and interpretation of ‘suffering’ is too enmeshed with the inner emotional state of discomfort caused by the presence of sin and evil. Whatever valid aspects of suffering can be applied to God are equally, and probably better, situated within the attributes of his compassion, grief and sorrow.</p>
<p class="sec"><b class="calibre8">Conclusions</b></p>
<p class="pn">I have argued in this chapter that God as a trinity of persons cannot suffer, and that far from being a hindrance to his love, his inability to suffer actually enhances the nature of his fully actualized love in all of its various fully actualized facets. In so doing the mystery of God and his love remains incomprehensible, but I hope it remains with an enhanced clarity and realism and so with a more brilliant and awesome beauty.</p>
<p class="in">There are two points now that I wish to make by way of conclusion which will direct us to the next chapter. First, while I have consistently throughout this chapter and in previous chapters spoken of God’s all-consuming love for humankind and about humankind’s ability to experience and know God’s love, yet it is readily apparent that, because of sin, human persons are unable, without the aid of God, to experience fully and so fully know and thus fully appreciate the love that God has for them. Sin has so darkened the minds and hardened the hearts of human persons that they are incapable of laying hold of God’s love for them or, at times, of even desiring it. Only if sin and its effects are removed, so as to establish a new and proper relationship with God can human beings once more experience the immense love of God.</p>
<p class="in">The importance of this is seen with regard to human suffering. God loves those who suffer, for whatever the reason, with all of his perfect compassion and mercy, and yet because of the deadening and impairing effects of sin, those who suffer, for whatever reason, are incapable of fully experiencing it – even the innocent. They may partially experience and know the love of God’s compassion, but only when these deadening and impairing effects are removed and the suffering person is once more in a proper relationship with God will that person experience God’s full compassion.</p>
<p class="in"><a id="page_171" class="calibre3"></a>Second, redemption is the removal of sin and the healing of its effects so that humankind may once more be able to share fully in God’s love, and thus be free to experience his compassion and mercy in the midst of suffering. This, Christians believe, was accomplished through the Incarnation of the eternal Son of God who as man took upon himself the whole of human sinfulness with all of its effects, including suffering, and brought reconciliation by offering on the cross his life in love to the Father. Having been reconciled to the Father, human beings, through faith in the risen Jesus as Lord and Saviour, partake of the life of the Trinity, as adopted sons and daughters, through the transforming power of the Holy Spirit dwelling within them.</p>
<p class="in">Thus, only through the Incarnation and in Jesus’ redemptive death and resurrection are the causes of suffering adequately and fully dealt with. Moreover, it is only from within this radically new relationship with God, now made available in Jesus’ very person as the risen Savior and Lord, that human beings can be freed of the suffering caused by their own sin and so come to experience God’s love fully, and equally come to experience God’s love fully in the midst of suffering caused by the sin of others. To thoroughly appreciate the good news of Jesus Christ, in the light of sin and suffering, we must address all of these issues more fully, and so to that task we now turn.</p>
<p class="ntcon">1  In the book of Wisdom the everlasting and immortal nature of human beings also testifies to their being in God’s image and likeness. See Wis. 2:23. Frequently in the past ‘to be in the image and likeness of God’ has been limited to the spiritual qualities of the human person; those that are proper to ‘the soul,’ such as intellect and will This emphasis grew out of the philosophical body-soul distinction. Biblically, I do not this is entirely correct. The Bible does not make the philosophical body-soul distinction. In both the Old and New Testament the word ‘flesh’ (<i class="calibre5">basar</i> in Hebrew and translated as <i class="calibre5">sarx</i> in Greek) designates the whole human being in its creatureliness with an emphasis on its frailty, weakness and sinfulness. Equally, the Hebrew word <i class="calibre5">nepes</i> (translated by <i class="calibre5">psyche</i> in Greek) designates not the ‘soul’ as such but the complete human being as ‘living,’ and that one is only ‘alive’ in relation to God. These terms then emphasize not a division within the human being but the manner in which he is seen in relation to God. As a creature, in comparison to God, he is weak, frail and sinful, but nonetheless, because he is created by God, he is alive. In both instances, however, it is the whole human person, including the body, that is created in God’s image and likeness. Pauline theology also speaks of <i class="calibre5">pneuma</i>, but again this designates the whole human person now living and acting under the new authority, power, and life of the Holy Spirit which comes through living in Christ. The biblical dichotomy then does not refer to a division within human beings, but to a divide between being either ‘of the world’ or ‘of God.’ For a discussion of these various biblical notions see the appropriate entries in the standard biblical dictionaries: <i class="calibre5">The Theological Dictionary of the Old Testament, The Theological Dictionary of the New Testament</i>, and <i class="calibre5">The Anchor Bible Dictionary</i>.</p>
<p class="ntnl">It should also be noted that it is only through the bodily senses that one obtains knowledge and expresses the truth, and equally, it is only through the body that one expresses love and kindness to others. Therefore, even within the body-soul distinction, the whole human being shares in the divine-like characteristics. Moreover, it is often through a holy person’s face or countenance that the glory and love of God shines forth. The face can be an <i class="calibre5">icon</i> of God.</p>
<p class="ntnlf">2  This is true of all virtues. One can be courageous, kind, generous, etc. only if one performs such actions freely.</p>
<p class="ntnlf">3  Sin is always the free misuse of some good. Gluttony is the misuse of the good gift of food; lust the misuse of sex; lying the misuse of speech; and so on. For a good contemporary psychological, philosophical and theological account of the nature of sin, see C. Gestrich, <i class="calibre5">The Return of Splendor in the World: The Christian Doctrine of Sin and Forgiveness</i> (Grand Rapids: Eerdmans, 1997).</p>
<p class="ntnlf">4  K. Rahner, while he rejects the notion that suffering is the natural side-effect of an evolving world, does not believe that the misuse of human freedom sufficiently addresses the question of why there is suffering. Since human freedom is ultimately dependent upon God, he argues that the reason for, but not the source of, human suffering is hidden within the incomprehensibility of God, and so itself remains incomprehensible. See ‘Why Does God Allow Us To Suffer?’, <i class="calibre5">Theological Investigations</i>, Vol. 29 (New York: Crossroad, 1983), pp. 194–208.</p>
<p class="ntnlf">5  This is exemplified in that sinful human beings cannot see the face of the all-holy God and live. See Exod. 19:21, 33:18–23; Lev. 16:2; Num. 4:20; Is. 6:1–7. The whole point of the covenant was to once more consecrate the people in holiness so that they might keep the commandments and thus live a holy and god-like life. Only then could they worthily live in the presence of the all-holy God. See Exod. 19:6; Lev. 11:44–45, 19:2; Deut. 7:6.</p>
<p class="ntnlf">6  It is fascinating that within the Genesis narrative, while obviously not a literal account, after Adam and Eve have sinned and then hear God walking in the garden, they hide, and do so successfully. God is forced to search for Adam by calling out his name. The author(s) of this tradition obviously realized that God, being God, would know where Adam and Eve were. Why then does the story depict God as ignorant of their where-abouts? It seems to me that it does so precisely to show that, while sin has changed Adam and Eve into fearful enemies of God, sin has not so changed God. He does not know where they are because he has not been affected by their sin. God is still the same loving and ever-present God who continues to want to take his neighbourly late afternoon stroll with Adam and Eve in the garden. It is only after God realizes that they are hiding from him that it dawns on him that something is amiss – the neighbourhood has changed. They have rebelled against him and so have made him into an enemy that must now be feared and avoided.</p>
<p class="ntnl">While it is impossible to found a philosophical principle on one story from scripture, it seems evident here that God is portrayed as not being affected by human sin. It does not cause him to suffer any change, and this is to his advantage for he remains the ever-loving God even in the face of sin and evi.</p>
<p class="ntnlf">7  The reality of death, as a necessary consequence of sin, becomes then the real symbol of the deeper death that has occurred, that of spiritual death (a life lived without God). Moreover, for Jews and Christians alike, death is seen as an evil because it is destructive of God’s good creation and contrary to everything God, as the living God, stands for. It is an insult to the author of life. Likewise, since the whole of the human being, including the body, reflects the image and likeness of God, bodily death shattered this image and likeness. However, even within early Judaism death was not seen as the complete annihilation of the human person. While there was no clear belief in an afterlife, yet the concept of Sheol testifies to some shadowy existence after death. This is important for while death bore witness to humankind’s moral separation from God, it did not shatter its ontological relationship with God. Death could defile God’s good creation and render it corruptible, but it could not completely obliterate it. We see here why sin must be dealt with and why the resurrection of the body is important within Christianity. Only if sin is overcome will death be overcome. And death is only conquered if humankind is completely restored to God’s image and likeness, which demands the restoration of the body.</p>
<p class="ntnl">This is in contrast to the ontological dualisms of the ancient (and even contemporary) world. Death is the final evil matter inflicts on the spiritual soul. Once free the soul lives unencumbered. This is why the Platonists of the Areopagus mocked Paul when he proclaimed ‘the good news’ of the resurrection of the body (see Acts 17:22–34). For the Platonists of Athens ‘the good news’ was ‘bad news.’ The last thing they wanted returned to them was their bodies.</p>
<p class="ntnlf">8  This last point should not be forgotten. One never finds a happy tyrant, pornographer, abortionist, money-grubber, or power-mogul. The cunning seductiveness and disingenuous allurement of sin always exacts its own traitorous revenge.</p>
<p class="ntnlf">9  The question of the suffering caused by natural ‘disasters’ – floods, drought, earthquakes, hurricanes, and tornadoes – can be seen as part of this biblical perspective. While such physical phenomena in one sense are not evil, since they are, as least in our present universe, but the result of the laws of nature, yet, because they cause destruction and human suffering, they are nonetheless rightly perceived as threats and the causes of suffering. Whether such natural phenomena would occur in a perfect non-sinful world is difficult to surmise. It would seem that they would not. What complicates the issue is the scientific theory of the ‘big bang’ with its resulting evolution which sees the massive convulsions at the dawn of the universe as part of the formative processes of the universe. Here such things as earthquakes are but the remaining ‘after-shocks’ of such a formative process and not the result of the universe being infected by sin. While such scientific theories may be true, one can still question whether the universe would not be more ‘stable’ and ‘peaceful’ had man not sinned. From the biblical perspective man, as the pinnacle of creation and for whom creation was made, is creation’s steward, and so what affects man affects the whole of which he is a part.</p>
<p class="ntull">10  Traditionally within Catholic theology, stemming from Augustine and developed by Aquinas, this compulsion or inordinate desire to sin is known as concupiscence and is seen as a consequence of original sin. While concupiscence in itself is not sinful, contrary to Luther and Calvin, yet because it is a disorder within humanity due to sin, it must be overcome and healed through grace.</p>
<p class="ntnl">Within the Eastern Orthodox tradition mortality or corruptibility is seen as the consequence of sin. Unlike the West, which emphasizes that humankind inherits the guilt of Adam’s sin with its consequences, the East emphasizes that humankind inherits simply the consequence of Adam’s sin – death. Humankind shares a solidarity in death and not a solidarity in guilt. Because humankind is now corruptible it is prone to sin, and can only be healed of sin by once more taking on the divine life of incorruptibility. While there is a difference of emphasis between the East and the West, both nonetheless see sin and its consequences as the corruption of God’s good creation. See <i class="calibre5">J</i>. Meyendorff, <i class="calibre5">Byzantine Theology: Historical Trends and Doctrinal Themes</i> (New York: Fordham University Press, 1974), pp. 143–46.</p>
<p class="ntull">11  Aquinas states that ‘being and perfection of any nature is good. Hence it cannot be that evil signifies being, or any form or nature. Therefore it must be that by the name of evil is signified the absence of good.’ <i class="calibre5">ST</i>, I, 48, 1. See also ad 2 and 4.</p>
<p class="ntnl">Pope John Paul II states:</p>
<p class="bq1f">Man suffers on account of evil, which is a certain lack, limitation or distortion of good. We could say that man suffers <i class="calibre5">because of a good</i> in which he does not share, from which in a certain sense he is cut off, or of which he has deprived himself. He particularly suffers when he ‘ought’ – in the normal order of things – to have a share in this good, and does not have it. <i class="calibre5">Salvifici Doloris</i> (1984) n. 7.</p>
<p class="ntnl">See also G. Grisez, <i class="calibre5">Beyond the New Theism</i>, pp. 295-96.</p>
<p class="ntull">12  See <i class="calibre5">ST, I</i>, 48, 2 and 3.</p>
<p class="ntull">13  It should be noted that because evil is always attached to some good and the corruption of a good, ‘evil cannot wholly consume good,’ in other words, something cannot be absolutely and totally evil in itself (<i class="calibre5">ST</i>, I, 48, 4). There cannot be something that is ontologically evil in itself for evil must be attached to something that exists and existence, by its very nature, is a good. This is even true of Satan and the other fallen angels. They are not ontologically evil as such. While they seek only to do what is evil, and so have become totally depraved morally, yet they do so by freely misusing the good of their intellect and will (see <i class="calibre5">ST</i>, I, 63 and 64). The good of their intellect and will remains even if they use these goods only to do evil.</p>
<p class="ntnl">It should be noted as well that pain and suffering are good in so far as they make us aware of the presence, and so repugnance, of sin and evil. For example, the experience of physical pain is good because it alerts us to an immediate or pending evil. The pain caused by a burn allows us to pull our hand away from the fire. However, while the pain may be good, it is good because it is alerting us to the danger of losing some good, and for that reason alone it is good. While pain and suffering allow us to respond properly to evil, they are not good in themselves.</p>
<p class="ntull">14  By stating here that God does not suffer I am simply and only denying of God what most contemporary theologians, who espouse a suffering God, wish to assert. However, it must be asserted as well that this does not mean, as we will see, that God does not grieve over sin and evil, and the suffering that these cause. In a true and authentic sense God does grieve and sorrow over sin and evil, but he does so in a manner that is in keeping with his impassible nature.</p>
<p class="ntull">15  J. Moltmann holds that his view of God is panentheistic. See <i class="calibre5">The Trinity and the Kingdom of God</i>, pp. 106–8; <i class="calibre5">God in Creation</i>, 90–103; and <i class="calibre5">The Crucified God</i>, p. 277. See also Johnson, <i class="calibre5">She Who Is</i>, pp. 231–33.</p>
<p class="ntnl">While Moltmann is critical of process thought, his own version of panentheism, nonetheless, leaves him open to the criticisms I am about to make. For critiques of Moltmann’s view of a suffering God within the context of panentheism, see D. Attfield, ‘Can God be Crucified? A Discussion of J. Moltmann,’ <i class="calibre5">Scottish Journal of Theology</i> 30 (1977):47–57; D.B. Farrow, ‘Review Essay: In the End Is the Beginning: A Review of Jürgen Moltmann’s Systematic Contributions,’ <i class="calibre5">Modern Theology</i> 14/3 (1998):425–47; J. Galot, ‘Le Dieu Trinitaire et la Passion du Christ,’ <i class="calibre5">Nouvelle Revue Theologique</i> 104/1 (1982):70–87; J. McIntyre’s review of Moltmann’s <i class="calibre5">God in Creation</i> in <i class="calibre5">Scottish Journal of Theology</i> 41 (1988):267–73; P. Molnar, ‘The Function of the Trinity in Moltmann’s Ecological Doctrine of Creation,’ <i class="calibre5">Theological Studies</i> 51 (1990):673–97; P. Molnar, ‘Moltmann’s Post-Modern Messianic Christology,’ <i class="calibre5">The Thomist</i> 56/4 (1992):669–93; O’Donnell, <i class="calibre5">Trinity and Temporality</i>, pp. 109–10, 119–20; B. Walsh, ‘Theology of Hope and the Doctrine of Creation: An Appraisal of Jürgen Moltmann,’ <i class="calibre5">Evangelical Quarterly</i> 59 (1987):53–76; J. Webster, ‘Jürgen Moltmann: Trinity and Suffering,’ <i class="calibre5">Evangel</i> Summer (1985):4–6.</p>
<p class="ntull">16  Panentheists could argue that, due to God’s being in more than all else and not exhausted by all else, he ‘transcends’ all else and so is ontologically different from all else. However, God’s transcendence is only relatively, and not absolutely, ontologically different. Since God does not wholly exist in a distinct ontological order from all else, he must exist within the same ontological order as all else. In reality there is only one ontological order which contains both God and all else, and God is different only to the extent that his existence is not entirely exhausted by all else that exists in that one ontological order.</p>
<p class="ntull">17  P. Fiddes and K. Ward are critical of process thought in that they wish to uphold God as Creator, and argue that God suffers by his free loving choice and not, as in process thought, by necessity. Nonetheless, they too see God as constantly changing and so perfecting himself, and thus experiencing temporality, through his relationship to world history and human events. (See Fiddes, <i class="calibre5">The Creative Suffering of God</i>, pp. 46–143 and Ward, <i class="calibre5">Religion and Creation</i>, pp. 159–284.) They rightly perceive, as does process thought, that if God is to suffer as God, he must be ontologically ensconced within the created order, in that his being or nature (who he is) is partially determined or established by the created, historical and temporal order. He relates to and interacts with the created order not as one who is ontologically distinct from the created order, but as one who ontologically exists within that order and so relates to and interacts with the created order from within the created order, and so is changed and perfected by so doing. However, because God is now, at least partially, only truly who he is because of his existence within the created order it is impossible to uphold the biblical notion that God is wholly other than the created order. What Fiddes and Ward forget is that if God is wholly other than the created order. What Fiddes and Ward forget is that if God is wholly other than the created order, and he must be if he is to be its Creator, it is metaphysically impossible for him to become an ontological member of that order. God can, and does, relate to and interact with the created order, and he does so in a most intimate and immediate manner (as I have argued), but he does so as the one who is completely other than the created order without losing his complete otherness in so doing. As I have stressed previously, and will do so again when discussing the Incarnation, this is the Judeo-Christian mystery.</p>
<p class="ntull">18  The fundamental philosophical defect of such a monistic system as exemplified in process philosophy (one that would apply to Hegel’s philosophy as well) is that it is impossible to account for why anything <i class="calibre5">exists</i>, including God. It can account for why God is the way he is and how he works, and why the world is the way it is and how it works, but why God or the world exist at all is completely unaccounted for. Nothing accounts for the existence of the process for nothing is outside the process, and to claim that the process is eternal simply begs the question for there must be something within the process that accounts for its eternal <i class="calibre5">existence</i>, and there is none. God, as in Plato’s demiurge, is creative only in the sense that he orders and influences the process, but he does not bring the process into existence since his own existence is entirely dependent upon the process.</p>
<p class="ntull">19  An excellent example of this is found in D. Griffin’s book <i class="calibre5">God, Power, and Evil</i> (Lanham, MD: University of America Press, 1991). Here Griffin states:</p>
<p class="bq1f">The general thesis of the process theodicy which follows is that the possibility of genuine evil is rooted in the metaphysical (i.e., necessary) characteristics of the world. In Whitehead’s words: ‘The categories governing the determination of things are the reasons why there should be evil’ (<i class="calibre5">Process and Reality</i>, p. 341). P. 276.</p>
<p class="ntnl">Since God, out of his own goodness, does not create the world (<i class="calibre5">creatio ex nihilo</i>) to be good in itself, but rather, because he too is subject to the metaphysical principles contained within the cosmic process of which he is a part, he merely attempts to bring order and harmony to an already pre-existing primordial ‘state of absolute or near chaos’ (p. 286). Because God is limited both by the philosophical principles contained within the process of which he is a part and because the process is metaphysically chaotic at the onset, evil within the whole cosmic process must be ‘metaphysical and not moral’ (p. 276). Since God did not freely establish the metaphysical principles, he cannot be blamed for the evil within the world. ‘Since the metaphysical principles have no conceivable alternative, they are not “given,” not “arbitrary,” and hence should not be thought of as resulting from a volition’ (p. 299), and thus they do ‘not result from a divine decision’ (p. 300). See pp. 277–310.</p>
<p class="ntnl">We have obviously returned to the pagan religious and Greek ontological dualisms of the past. In his early works Griffin, as well as other process theologians such as Pittinger and Ogden, criticized the early church Fathers for being unfaithful to biblical revelation by allowing Platonism to disfigure it. In response to this accusation, I argued that it is was process theology that was more faithful to Platonism both in its view of God and as to the cause and nature of evil (see Weinandy, <i class="calibre5">Does God Change?</i>, pp. 140–53). It is fascinating that more recently Griffin criticizes, and I believe now rightly so from a process perspective, the early church for not being faithful to Platonism in that it espoused the concept of <i class="calibre5">creatio ex nihilo</i>, and so affirmed a ‘supernaturalistic version of theism.’ If Christianity had been faithful to what Griffin now believes is its Platonic heritage, it would have realized that ‘God cannot create a universe such as ours instantaneously, unilaterally prevent evil events, infallibly reveal divine truth, or inerrantly inspire sacred scripture’ (’A Naturalistic Trinity’ in <i class="calibre5">Trinity in Process</i>, pp. 23 and 24). While Griffin may still hold a very dubious version of Christianity, he has at least got it right that process thought has more in common with Platonism than it has with traditional Christian doctrine.</p>
<p class="ntnl">Moreover, while Griffin and other process theologians hold that God continuously ‘lures’ or ‘persuades’ all other realities, such as human beings, to actualize ‘the good’ within the cosmic process, and so overcome evil, there is no metaphysical grounding for this. Since God is not ontologically ultimate within process thought, containing all good and perfection in his immutable actualized self, there is no reason to presume that he ‘contains all goods’ nor that ‘good’ will ultimately triumph. There is simply no ontological foundation for such goods and values as justice and love. They exist in an ontological vacuum and so to assert their existence is completely gratuitous.</p>
<p class="ntnl">Last, to speak of God suffering, as process philosophers and theologians glory in doing, is at best a euphemism. All God does, within his concrete or consequent nature, is to record that a human person has suffered. The suffering is not present to him as the contemporary suffering of a person, but merely the objective past idea. C. Gunton correctly states that, within process thought, God ‘plays the essentially passive role as a cosmic memory.’ ‘Process Theology’s Concept of God,’ <i class="calibre5">The Expository Times</i> 84 (1973):294.</p>
<p class="ntnl">For critiques of process thought other than my own, see the authors mentioned in Weinandy, <i class="calibre5">Does God Change?</i>, pp. 140–53. See also N. Frankenberry, ‘Some Problems in Process Theodicy,’ <i class="calibre5">Religious Studies</i> 17 (1981):179–97; W. Hill, ‘The Historicity of God,’ pp. 320–33; J. McIntyre, <i class="calibre5">The Shape of Christology</i> (Second Edition) (Edinburgh: T &amp; T Clark, 1998), pp. 177–255; M. Rousseau, ‘Process Thought and Traditional Theism: A Critique,’ <i class="calibre5">The Modern Schoolman</i> 62 (1985):45–64; H. Smith, ‘Has Process Theology Dismantled Classical Theism?’, <i class="calibre5">Theological Digest</i> 35/4 (1988):303–18; Vanhoutte, ‘God as Companion and Fellow-Sufferer’, pp. 191–225; J.H. Wright, ‘The Method of Process Theology: An Evaluation’, <i class="calibre5">Communio</i>, 6/1 (1979):38–55.</p>
<p class="ntull">20  R. Goetz believes that ‘any concept of a limited deity finally entails a denial of the capacity of God to redeem the world and thus, ironically, raises the question of whether God is in the last analysis even love, at least love in the Christian sense of the term.’ ‘The Suffering God: The Rise of a New Orthodoxy,’ p. 388.</p>
<p class="ntnl">J. Selling states:</p>
<p class="bq1f">In the end, the image of a God who suffers along with creation is incapable of challenging the tragedy of human suffering itself…. For if God <i class="calibre5">suffers</i> – experiencing pain without meaning or justification – then we are more alone and hopeless than our fear and anxiety could imagine. ‘Moral Questioning and Human Suffering’ in <i class="calibre5">God and Human Suffering</i>, p. 170.</p>
<p class="ntnl">In response to Moltmann and others, K. Rahner states: ‘To put it crudely, it does not help me to escape from my mess and mix-up and despair if God is in the same predicament.’ <i class="calibre5">Karl Rahner in Dialogue: Conversations and Interviews 1965–1982</i>, eds P. Imhof and H. Biallowons (New York: Crossroad, 1986), p. 126. Moltmann responded to Rahner’s rejection of a suffering God by saying that such comments sound as if they come from a person whose life was ‘unloved and incapable of love,’ a life that was ‘frozen’ and ‘fossilized’, and ‘one which is already dead.’ He asks: ‘Are these the pains of being cut off from natural relationships which celibacy imposes on a young man enthused by God?’ <i class="calibre5">History and the Triune God</i>, p. 123. To disagree with Rahner is legitimate. To accuse him of being incapable of loving due to his vow of celibacy is, well, a punch that is a little below the belt.</p>
<p class="ntnl">In agreement with Rahner, J.-B. Metz, on a number of occasions, has adamantly rejected the notion of a suffering God. He argues that a suffering God merely duplicates human suffering and powerlessness, but now hopelessly eternalizes them within God. See ‘Suffering Unto God,’ <i class="calibre5">Critical Inquiry</i> 20 (1994):618–20, and <i class="calibre5">A Passion for God: The Mystical-Political Dimension of Christianity</i> (New York: Paulist Press, 1998), pp. 69–71 and 116–20.</p>
<p class="ntnl">M. Steen expresses similar sentiments about the hopelessness of the human situation in the face of a suffering God. See ‘The Theme of the “Suffering” God: An Exploration’ in <i class="calibre5">God and Human Suffering</i>, pp. 90–93.</p>
<p class="ntull">21  G. Hanratty forcefully argues that God cannot suffer because he cannot be deprived of any good. See ‘Divine Immutability and Impassibility Revisited’ in <i class="calibre5">At the Heart of the Real</i>, pp. 157–59. M. Rousseau argues in a similar manner. See ‘Process Thought and Traditional Theism: A Critique,’ p. 53.</p>
<p class="ntull">22  P. Helm states:</p>
<p class="bqull">Since there is nothing morally wrong or intellectually incoherent with emotional change <i class="calibre5">per se</i>, the reason for not ascribing it to God must be that it is incompatible with other, more deeply entrenched (in terms of the biblical data) divine attributes and powers. ‘The Impossibility of Divine Impassibility,’ p. 130.</p>
<p class="bq1f">See also Davies, <i class="calibre5">Thinking About God</i>, pp. 156–57.</p>
<p class="ntull">23  R. Creel admirably argues for why suffering within God debilitates him and makes him the one to be most pitied. See <i class="calibre5">Divine Impassibility</i>, pp. 121–26. D. Cook emphasizes that for those who espouse a suffering God it appears that suffering is more important than its cure. See ‘Weak Church, Weak God’ in <i class="calibre5">The Power and Weakness of God</i>, pp. 77, 86, 88–89.</p>
<p class="ntull">24  It is not necessary here to delineate the various types of love, e.g., <i class="calibre5">eros</i> and <i class="calibre5">agape</i>, other than to say that within the New Testament and the Christian tradition <i class="calibre5">agape</i> came to be seen as the fullest expression of selfless love first founded within God himself and then infused or given to creatures by the grace of the Holy Spirit. For Aquinas <i class="calibre5">amicitia</i> (friendship) is the most perfect aspect of love (<i class="calibre5">caritas</i>) for it implies intensity and fervour. For a study on the relationship between love and friendship in Aquinas, see Dodds, <i class="calibre5">The Unchanging God of Love</i>, pp. 287–92.</p>
<p class="ntull">25  In many situations it is precisely sin and the prospect of suffering that hinders the full development and expression of love. A person may desire, on one level, to love someone wholly and entirely, but be incapable of doing so because of the sinfulness which resides within his/her own person causing fear of the sacrifices required of such love. Selfishness, pride, etc. hinder the full growth and expression of love.</p>
<p class="ntull">26  Aquinas states that all sorrow in itself is an evil, but that ‘it is a sign of goodness if a man is in sorrow or pain on account of this present evil. For if he were not to be in sorrow or pain, this could only be either because he feels it not, or because he does not reckon it as something unbecoming, both of which are manifest evil. Consequently it is a condition of goodness, that, supposing an evil to be present, sorrow or pain should ensue’ (<i class="calibre5">ST</i>, I–II, 39, 1). Sorrow, then, as the perception and rejection of evil is a virtuous good (see <i class="calibre5">ST</i>, I–II, 39, 2).</p>
<p class="ntnl">M. Dodds notes that those who propose that God suffers tend equally to hold that suffering is only ‘seemingly’ an evil. In reality it is actually a good. He quotes F. von Hügel: ‘Suffering is intrinsically an Evil. It is impossible to read much of the literature which insists upon the presence of Suffering in God, without being struck with the trend – I believe the inevitable trend, once Suffering has been admitted into God – to treat that Suffering as but a seeming Evil.’ <i class="calibre5">Essays and Address on the Philosophy of Religion: Second Series</i>, p. 199. See <i class="calibre5">The Unchanging God of Love</i>, pp. 441–42, n. 80. D. Cook concurs: ‘The charge against those who embrace the ideas of the weakness and suffering of God is that they have omitted any adequate treatment of the nature and seriousness of sin.’ ‘Weak Church, Weak God,’ p. 72. See also p. 88.</p>
<p class="ntull">27  Aquinas states that God does not act for the acquisition of something, that is, he never acts in order to acquire some good for himself. Rather, God acts ‘only to communicate his perfection, which is his goodness.’ <i class="calibre5">ST</i>, I, 44, 4. Obviously, God is able to act in such a totally unselfish manner only because, as pure act, he is in need of nothing.</p>
<p class="ntnl">In response to Moltmann, M. Dodds rightly perceives that a suffering God who, by necessity, is an ontologically imperfect being, ‘will inevitably seek his own perfection and try to overcome his own deficiency. Only an entirely perfect being, subject to no defect and lacking in nothing, is able to love with a fully gratuitous love.’ ‘Thomas Aquinas, Human Suffering, and the Unchanging God of Love,’ <i class="calibre5">Theological Studies</i> 52 (1991):333. See also p. 332.</p>
<p class="ntnl">W. Hill likewise states:</p>
<p class="bq1f">It is this uniqueness of divine being, whereby God does not and cannot suffer in himself, that explains why he can love unfathomably, in a totally altruistic way, why divine love can be what the New Testament calls <i class="calibre5">agape</i> rather than only the self-fulfilling <i class="calibre5">eros</i> of Greek rational thought. ‘Does Divine Love Entail Suffering in God?’ p. 64.</p>
<p class="ntnl">Hill further develops the difference between the philosophical notion of <i class="calibre5">eros</i> and the Christian understanding of <i class="calibre5">agape</i> in his article ‘Two Gods of Love: Aquinas and Whitehead,’ pp. 252–57.</p>
<p class="ntulf">On the free liberality of God’s love, see also Blocher, ‘Divine Immutability,’ p. 21; and Cook, ‘Weak Church Weak God,’ p. 76, both in <i class="calibre5">The Power and Weakness of God</i>; Burrell, <i class="calibre5">Aquinas: God and Action</i>, pp. 87–89; and N. Kretzmann, <i class="calibre5">The Metaphysics of Theism: Aquinas’s Natural Theology in</i> Summa Contra Gentiles <i class="calibre5">I</i> (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1997), pp. 250–54.</p>
<p class="ntull">28  See <i class="calibre5">Scriptum Super Libros Sententiarum</i>, IV, 46, 2, 1, 1.</p>
<p class="ntull">29  God’s love as fully actualized in the pure act that he is as a trinity of persons accounts for the all-consuming passion of God expressed in the Old Testament.</p>
<p class="ntnl">It should be noted that to say that God’s love is fully in act in no way implies that we can fully grasp what it means to say such. We can know that the trinity of persons love one another fully and completely, but we cannot fully comprehend what such a loving relationship is like. For God to be love fully in act is beyond human comprehension. Again we can know what the mystery is, but we cannot comprehend the mystery.</p>
<p class="ntnl">Moreover, we now can grasp why God cannot merely be ‘ethically immutable’ as I.A. Dorner, K. Barth, K. Ward, R. Swinburne and others have proposed. If God is not pure goodness and love ontologically in act, and thus ontologically immutable, then there is no philosophical or theological ground upon which one can claim that God will always be ethical and faithful. Only an ontologically immutable God, in the pure act that he is, embraces, fully in act, goodness itself and love itself. Only as such is he always assured to act ethically in his dealings with human beings and to remain faithful to his promises. The ‘ethical immutability’ of the Bible (if that is in fact only what the Bible actually asserts) testifies to and mandates the ‘ontological immutability’ of God.</p>
<p class="ntnl">R.A. Muller writes:</p>
<p class="bq1f">Ethical, intentional constancy … must have an ontological basis. The constancy of the divine purpose, the consistency of the God who is what he is and will be what he will be, must also indicate a consistency, an immutability of the divine being…. The issue is not so much whether Scripture declares ontological immutability, but that this concept is strongly implied. ‘Incarnation, Immutability, and the Case for Classical Theism,’ <i class="calibre5">Westminster Theological Journal</i> 45 (1983):32.</p>
<p class="ntull">30  J. Quinn argues that it is the love expressed within the Trinity that is the basis for the Trinity’s love for human beings. As the persons of the Trinity give themselves entirely to one another in love so they give themselves entirely to human beings in love. It is this complete self-giving love of the Trinity, especially witnessed within the Incarnation, which is the Trinity’s answer to human suffering. See ‘Triune Self-Giving,’ pp. 194–202.</p>
<p class="ntull">31  In <a href="08_Chapter01.xhtml" class="calibre3">Chapter 1</a>, fn. 38 I noted that, while J. Galot and H.U. von Balthasar (and maybe K. Barth as well) hold that God is immutable and impassible in himself, yet in their own distinctive manner, they feel obliged to argue that, in his freely constituted relationship with humankind, he is indeed passible. The reason for proffering such a position lies in their belief that God’s immutability and impassibility are incompatible with his engaging in a loving relationship with humankind, a relationship in which he is compassionate and merciful, and even suffers. What they have failed to grasp is the argument that I have just offered. They do not perceive that God’s immutability and impassibility do not make him less loving toward humankind, but actually guarantee that his love contains all its various attributes fully and perfectly in act. Immutability and impassibility must never be perceived, as Galot and von Balthasar do, as stumbling blocks that need to be overcome, as if, despite being immutable and impassible, God is nonetheless, in a dialectic fashion, still loving and merciful. Rather, God’s immutability and impassibility are the absolute presuppositions and prolegomena for ensuring that he is perfectly loving. Moreover, by attempting to distinguish between God-in-himself and God-for-us, a distinction that is highly dubious in itself, they have placed a breach between God as he truly is and God who relates to us. Such a chasm is not only philosophically unwarranted, but it is also theologically detrimental to biblical revelation and the Christian tradition, which glories in the fact that God actually interacts with and relates to us as he truly is in the fullness of his divinity. God need not ‘re-fashion’ himself in order to interact with us.</p>
<p class="ntnl">For further critiques of Galot, see J.-H. Nicolas, ‘La Souffrance de Dieu?’, <i class="calibre5">Nova et Vetera</i> 53 (1978):56–64; ‘Aimante et Bienheureuse Trinité’, <i class="calibre5">Revue Thomiste</i> 73 (1978):271–87; E.L. Mascall, <i class="calibre5">Theology and the Gospel of Christ</i> (London: Darton, Longman &amp; Todd, 1977), pp. 182–84; <i class="calibre5">Whatever Happened to the Human Mind?</i>, pp. 94–95; and Weinandy, <i class="calibre5">Does God Change?</i>, pp. 174–86.</p>
<p class="ntull">32  P. Helm argues that if God’s love is seen as dispositional in a human manner, then we might think of God as exercising this disposition depending upon the need of creatures. ‘Once the need vanishes, the disposition is no longer exercised.’</p>
<p class="bq1f">But this is altogether the wrong way of thinking about the character of God; for it supposes that there are occasions when God is less than wholly active, and moreover that these are the typical conditions of his existence. So that while it may be helpful to think of God’s moral attributes as dispositions, in that they have the stability and uniformity that dispositions in general have, unlike human dispositions they are dispositions that are always/eternally exercised. They are maximally active; that is, there is no actual situation in which God requires to exercise a given disposition in which that disposition is not exercised, every disposition that comprises the divine character is exercised, and each is exercised without any limitation or conditionality. So that, for example the love of God is never not exercised where it is appropriate for it to be exercised. ‘The Impossibility of Divine Passibility,’ pp. 124–25.</p>
<p class="ntull">33  R. Creel states that ‘if I repent and consequently experience God’s forgiveness, it is not because God has responded to my repentance that I feel forgiveness; rather it is the case that by my repentance I have put myself in the stream of his forgiveness.’ <i class="calibre5">Divine Impassibility</i>, p. 30. While I basically agree with Creel, I would want to say that God does respond to ‘my repentance’ though he does so in a manner that does not imply a change in him since his forgiveness is a facet of his fully actualized, and so unchanging, love.</p>
<p class="ntull">34  This notion of God’s fully actualized love as containing all the various facets and expressions of love provides theological depth and philosophical precision to the patristic understanding which equally subsumed God’s anger under the rubric of God’s love.</p>
<p class="ntull">35  <i class="calibre5">ST</i>, II–II, 30, 2, ad 1. Since compassion in God pertains to his love, it is not a passion, in Aquinas’ understanding of passion, but ‘simple an act of the will’ (<i class="calibre5">Scriptum Super Libros Sententiarum</i>, IV, 46, 2, 1, 1).</p>
<p class="ntull">36  M. Dodds states:</p>
<p class="bqul">If it were my friend’s compassionate suffering itself that brought me consolation, then I would be in the peculiar situation of reacting in quite the opposite way to my friend’s suffering from the way that he reacts to mine. For I would be taking some sort of joy in his suffering while he reacts rather with sadness at my own.</p>
<p class="bqulf">Compassionate suffering is both a consequence of love and a sign of love. But it is love rather than suffering that we truly admire in the compassionate person, and it is love rather than suffering that brings healing and comfort to the person for whom we have compassion. <i class="calibre5">The Unchanging God of Love</i>, p. 300.</p>
<p class="ntnl">See also Davies, <i class="calibre5">Thinking About God</i>, p. 156.</p>
<p class="ntull">37  For ‘anger’ see <i class="calibre5">ST</i>, I, 19, 11; II–II, 162, 3, and <i class="calibre5">SCG</i>, I, 89, 14; I, 91, 16.</p>
<p class="ntull">38  <i class="calibre5">ST</i>, I, 21, 3.</p>
<p class="ntull">39  See <i class="calibre5">SCG</i>, 1, 89, 8 and 9.</p>
<p class="ntull">40  G. Grisez, in a personal letter, emphasizes that, because God is all loving and good and because he is aware of sin and evil, he finds sin and evil ‘repugnant.’ To speak of God grieving over sin is to specify the truth that, due to God’s goodness and love, sin and evil are repugnant to him.</p>
<p class="ntull">41  <i class="calibre5">SCG</i>, I, 91, 15.</p>
<p class="ntull">42  <i class="calibre5">SCG</i>, I, 91, 17. See Kretzmann, <i class="calibre5">The Metaphysics of Theism</i>, pp. 226–54.</p>
<p class="ntull">43  <i class="calibre5">ST</i>, I–II, 47, 1, ad 1.</p>
<p class="ntull">44  ‘Quelques Réflexions sur le Savoir Théologique.’ <i class="calibre5">Revue Thomiste</i> 69/1 (1969):17. See also pp. 16–27. See also J.-H. Nicolas, ‘La Souffrance de Dieu?’, <i class="calibre5">Nova Et Vetera</i> 53 (1978):60; and Burrell, <i class="calibre5">Knowing the Unknowable God</i>, pp. 59–61.</p>
<p class="ntull">45  <i class="calibre5">ST</i>, I, 21, 3. See also <i class="calibre5">SCG</i>, I, 91, 16.</p>
<p class="ntull">46  Aquinas states:</p>
<p class="bq1f">In anything that is said of God and of man, it is understood of each one according to his mode. Therefore, when compassion is said of God, it is taken according to the mode of God, and in man, according to the mode of man. Compassion is in man when he suffers (<i class="calibre5">compatitur</i>) at the distress of another …. But it is not in God in this way. For God is impassible and does not suffer…. Compassion is in God when he repels the distress of any particular thing. <i class="calibre5">In Psalrnos</i>, xxiv, 8; translation from Dodds, <i class="calibre5">The Unchanging God of Love</i>, p. 301.</p>
<p class="ntull">47  W. Hill points out that true human compassion, which entails suffering, ‘is an attempt to alleviate his or her pain.’ Thus ‘the core reality of love’ is not in the suffering, but is the attempt to alleviate the cause of suffering as much as possible. ‘Only when its resources are exhausted due to its finitude, is it [love] content with compassion for the friend in a loving endeavour to lessen this misery by sharing it in a vicarious and sympathetic way. Compassion, then (as opposed to mere pity) characterizes love, not as such but in its finite modes.’ ‘Does Divine Love Entail Suffering in God?’ p. 64.</p>
<p class="ntnl">While I agree with Hill, I would not want to limit compassion to human beings. God is compassionate, not in the sense that he suffers, but in so far as his all-consuming love goes out to those who suffer and in so doing acts to dispel the evil which is the cause of suffering.</p>
<p class="ntull">48  <i class="calibre5">ST</i>, II–II, 30, 4. J. Quinn argues that those who pit God’s love against his power, as if an all-powerful God would be an unloving tyrant, entirely miss the point of their relationship. His almighty power and perfect love are simply attributes of who God is. Thus, it is because God is all-loving that he can use his divine power to do loving deeds, and because he is all-powerful he is actually capable of doing them. See ‘Divine Self-Giving,’ pp. 184–85.</p>
<p class="ntull">49  M. Dodds insightfully notes that even within human compassion ‘the essence of compassion is more truly embodied in the love from which compassion springs and in the will to alleviate the distress of the beloved than it is in the sadness which accompanies our loving response…. It is not the degree of suffering as such that we admire in the compassionate person, but rather the degree of love which that suffering manifests. When Jesus wept at the death of Lazarus, the crowd did not say, “See how he suffers,” but “See how he loved him” (Jn 11:35–36).’ <i class="calibre5">The Unchanging God of Love</i>, pp. 298–99.</p>
<p class="ntnl">See also G. Hanratty, ‘Divine Immutability and Impassibility Revisited,’ pp 160–61, and Hill, ‘Two Gods of Love: Aquinas and Whitehead,’ p. 260.</p>
<p class="ntull">50  It is in this manner that Pope John Paul II, in his Encyclical on the Holy Spirit, speaks of pain within God. He states that sin reveals ‘<i class="calibre5">pain</i>, unimaginable and inexpressible, which on account of sin the Book of Genesis in its anthropomorphic vision seems to glimpse in the “depths of God” and in a certain sense in the very heart of the Trinity. The Church, taking her inspiration from Revelation, believes and professes that <i class="calibre5">sin is an offence against God</i>.’ He continues:</p>
<p class="bq1f">The concept of God as the necessarily most perfect being certainly excludes from God any pain deriving from deficiencies or wounds; but in the ‘depths of God’ there is a Father’s love that, faced with man’s sin, in the language of the Bible reacts so deeply as to say: ‘I am sorry that I have made him.’ … But more often the Sacred Book speaks to us of a Father who feels compassion for man, as though sharing his pain. In a word, this inscrutable and indescribable <i class="calibre5">fatherly ‘pain’ will bring about</i> above all the wonderful economy of redemptive love in Jesus Christ. <i class="calibre5">Dominum et Vivificantem</i> (1986), 39.</p>
<p class="ntnl">The Papal International Theological Commission, while critical of much contemporary theology that attributes suffering to God (for reasons similar to my own), and while it gives a very cautious and nuanced assessment of the manner in which suffering may be said of God, nonetheless is also willing, in a similar manner to John Paul and myself, to speak of the suffering of God. See <i class="calibre5">Theology, Christology, Anthropology</i> (1983), II, B. For a brief but good commentary on this section of the document, see B. de Margerie, ‘De la Souffrance de Dieu?’, <i class="calibre5">Esprit et Vie</i> 93 (1983):110–12.</p>
</body>
</html>
