<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en-US">
  <head>
    <title>Does God Suffer?</title>
    <link href="../styles/page-template.xpgt" rel="stylesheet" type="application/vnd.adobe-page-template+xml"/>
    <meta content="urn:uuid:e0000000-0000-0000-0000-000004626051" name="Adept.expected.resource"/>
    <meta http-equiv="Content-Type" content="text/html; charset=utf-8"/>
  <link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="../../stylesheet.css"/>
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="../../page_styles.css"/>
</head>
  <body class="calibre">
<p class="cta"><a id="page_172" class="calibre2"></a><a href="06_Contents.xhtml#ch8" id="ch8" class="calibre2">8</a></p>
<p class="cs"><a href="06_Contents.xhtml#ch8" class="calibre2">The Incarnation – The Impassible Suffers</a></p>
<p class="pn">Thus far in our study I have vigorously argued that the one God as a trinity of persons is impassible and so does not suffer, and I have done so to confirm and to intensify the consummate and ever-present love of the Trinity for creation. Nonetheless, sin and the suffering borne in its wake compelled the persons of the Trinity to immerse themselves more deeply in human suffering, not for their own sake, but for the sake of the creatures they loved. Humankind could not free itself from sin with all of its consequences, including death and damnation, and so could not free itself from suffering, most of all the suffering of everlasting separation from God, who is humankind’s supreme good and perfect joy. Only the Trinity could free humankind from sin and its consequences and restore it to a life of peace and joy – ultimately a life within the Trinity itself.</p>
<p class="in">Therefore, ‘God so loved the world that he gave his only Son, so that everyone who believes in him may not perish but may have eternal life. Indeed, God did not send the Son into the world to condemn the world, but in order that the world might be saved through him’ (Jn 3:16). This salvific ‘giving’ and ‘sending’ of the Son was into a world marred by sin and immersed in suffering, and so it was within this ‘giving’ and ‘sending’ that the Father manifested his absolute love (see 1 Jn 4:9). ‘In this is love, not that we loved God but that he loved us and sent his Son to be the atoning sacrifice (ίλασμòν) for our sins’ (1 Jn 4:11). It was through the Son’s sacrificial death, with all the suffering that this entailed, that the Father not only freed humankind from sin, with all of its distressing effects, but equally obtained for humankind a new life, through the Holy Spirit, within the loving embrace of the Trinity. Suffering, then, is at the heart of redemption, and so it is within redemption that the mystery (and absurdity) of human suffering is transformed and granted a new and even rational significance.</p>
<p class="in">It is here where much contemporary theology falls short. Many modern theologians are so consumed with championing a God who suffers in himself, that they fail to grasp the full significance of the Incarnation and the transforming effects of Christ’s redemptive suffering.<sup class="calibre6">1</sup> The <a id="page_173" class="calibre3"></a>significance of Christ’s suffering and death is no longer found in their historical truth and in the present and future efficacy that these actual events have upon human beings and their relationship to God, but rather, as is exemplified in the case of Moltmann, it is diminished to a mythological expression or symbol of what is happening transcendentally and ahistorically to and within God as God. Because contemporary theology has focused almost exclusively on God suffering within his divine nature, the true christological and soteriological import of Jesus’ suffering is thus either misconceived or neglected, and so enfeebled.</p>
<p class="in">Moreover, because much contemporary theology has failed to recognize the christological and soteriological significance of Christ’s suffering, it has in turn failed to grasp the unique ecclesial significance of suffering, that is, that those who now suffer in Christ, as members of his body, suffer and experience suffering in a radically different manner than those who have not come to faith in him. The Father’s response to sin and evil, and the suffering that flows from it, is Christ, and only those who fully live in Christ share fully in the Father’s response. Thus the singular evangelistic import of Christ’s suffering, within a tortured world which cries out in hopeless anguish, is completely lost.</p>
<p class="in">In order to further elaborate and respond to these issues I wish, in this and the following two chapters, to do three things. First, in this chapter I will examine the nature of the Incarnation so as to demonstrate that the Son of God does indeed truly suffer as man. Second, in <a href="16_Chapter09.xhtml" class="calibre3">Chapter 9</a>, I will establish the soteriological significance of the Son’s suffering as man. Third, in <a href="17_Chapter10.xhtml" class="calibre3">Chapter 10</a>, I will, in the light of Christ’s redemptive work, interpret the significance of human suffering. As in what has gone before, all the various elements must be properly understood and correctly placed in relationship to one another. Only then will we accurately discern the whole salvific mystery.</p>
<p class="sec"><b class="calibre8">The Incarnation and the Communication of Idioms</b></p>
<p class="pn">Since to argue from the New Testament evidence for the traditional understanding of the Incarnation would take us far afield from our present study, I adopt as my starting point, in accordance with the first four ecumenical councils and the inherited Christian tradition, three truths which must be simultaneously affirmed and upheld for a proper understanding of the Incarnation.<sup class="calibre6">2</sup> 1. It is <i class="calibre5">truly God</i> the Son who is man. <a id="page_174" class="calibre3"></a>Here, the emphasis is focused upon the full divinity of the Son. 2. It is <i class="calibre5">truly man</i> that the Son of God is. Here the emphasis is focused upon the full and complete humanity. 3. The Son of God <i class="calibre5">truly is</i> man. Here the emphasis is focused upon the ontological union between the person of the Son and his humanity.<sup class="calibre6">3</sup> These three statements can be incorporated in the following declaration: Jesus is one ontological entity, and the one ontological entity that Jesus is is the one person of the divine Son of God existing as a complete and authentic man.<sup class="calibre6">4</sup></p>
<p class="in">Now what is fascinating and pivotal for our present study is that, historically, the practice within early Christian piety and theology, which gave rise to and was formative of this doctrinal development was the use of what has come to be termed the communication of idioms (<i class="calibre5">communicatio idiomatum</i>/άντίδοσις τω̑ν ὶδιωμάτων), that is, the predicating of divine and human attributes of one and the same person – the Son. Examples of the communication of idioms would be: ‘The Son of God is born of Mary.’ Or ‘God suffered and died on the cross.’ The use of such language is, in one sense, quite peculiar, and may appear to be even unintelligible. One could rhetorically ask, and historically such was done: ‘How could God, who is self-existent and eternal, be born of a woman?’ Or ‘How could God, who is immutable and impassible, suffer and die?’ The use and practice of the communication of idioms grew up and developed as a ‘shorthand’ way of accenting the reality and intensifying the implications of the Incarnation. God as God could not be born, but if he became man, he could truly be born. God as God could not suffer, but if he existed as man, he could actually suffer and die. Nonetheless, almost every christological heresy found the use of the communication of idioms to be a scandal to proper piety and an assault <a id="page_175" class="calibre3"></a>upon philosophical and theological reason, and yet it was ultimately the undoing of every christological heresy.</p>
<p class="in">For example, the Docetists denied the reality of Jesus’ humanity precisely to protect the Son of God from encountering what seemed to them the unbecoming experiences of human weakness. In so doing they denied the second above stated truth. The Son of God could not be <i class="calibre5">truly</i> man and so truly hunger, thirst, suffer, and die. In contrast, one of the reasons Arius denied the full divinity of the Son was because, in taking on flesh and thus undergoing the weaknesses of the flesh, he could not possibly be <i class="calibre5">truly</i> God.<sup class="calibre6">5</sup> In so doing Arius denied the first above stated truth. Finally, Nestorius, while wishing to uphold the full divinity and the full humanity of Jesus, could not conceptually unite them in an ontological union for fear that such a union necessitated that the human experiences of the Son of God jeopardize the integrity of his divine status. In so doing he denied the third above stated truth that the Son of God <i class="calibre5">truly is</i> man.</p>
<p class="in">Thus, the whole of orthodox patristic christology, including the conciliar affirmations, can be seen as an attempt to defend the practice and to clarify the use of the communication of idioms. Why is this so? Simply, embedded within the communication of idioms are the above three truths essential for an authentic understanding of the Incarnation, and it is only in the defense and clarification of the communication of idioms that these three truths became explicitly grasped and manifestly articulated. It is <i class="calibre5">truly</i> the Son of God who <i class="calibre5">truly</i> is man and so suffers <i class="calibre5">truly</i> as man. Historically, then, it was not an orthodox or a conciliar account of the Incarnation that gave rise to the communication of idioms, it was the communication of idioms that gave rise to the conciliar and orthodox account of the Incarnation. Moreover, the communication of idioms having given rise to the proper understanding of the Incarnation, this proper understanding of the Incarnation in turn clarified and validated its use. Therefore, the communication of idioms, today as in the past, continues to be the test of christological orthodoxy.</p>
<p class="in">As we saw in the first chapter, many contemporary theologians, who espouse a God who suffers in himself, find the traditional understanding of the Incarnation, with its use of the communication of idioms, inadequate. For them it is not enough to say that the Son of God grieved, suffered, and died only as man, but remained unaffected as God. They wish to exploit the communication of idioms so as to establish the <a id="page_176" class="calibre3"></a>premise that God, within the Incarnation, does indeed grieve and suffer as God. Even the death of Jesus affects his divinity. Because of this it is necessary to examine more closely the patristic and conciliar teaching and in so doing to clarify the exact nature of the Incarnation and the proper understanding of the communication of idioms.</p>
<p class="in">The Council of Nicea with its champion, Athanasius, upheld the full divinity of the Son – the Son is God as the Father is God. The one being or reality of God is the Father begetting the Son and so the Son is <i class="calibre5">homoousion</i> (one in being) with the Father.<sup class="calibre6">6</sup> Thus, the first of our incarnational truths was defined. While Ignatius of Antioch (d. circa <small class="calibre10">AD</small>107) very early on defended, against the Docetists, the full humanity of Jesus through his use of the communication of idioms, it was only with the condemnation of Apollinarius, who denied the human soul of Jesus, that his full humanity was definitively defined, and so the second of our incarnational truths was made explicit.<sup class="calibre6">7</sup> The central incarnational issue subsequently arose within the Nestorian controversy. How could the Son <a id="page_177" class="calibre3"></a>of God actually <i class="calibre5">become</i> man without jeopardizing the integrity of his full divinity or his full humanity? It was the third of our incarnational truths that now needed to be clarified and made explicit. Not surprisingly it was the communication of idioms that sparked the controversy, but what is not fully appreciated is that it was equally the communication of idioms which was the hermeneutical key for unlocking the true ontological nature of the incarnational ‘becoming’ and the ensuing ontological union between the divinity and humanity.</p>
<p class="sec"><b class="calibre8">Nestorius and the Communication of Idioms</b></p>
<p class="pn">Nestorius rightly wished to uphold Christ’s full divinity and the full humanity. He realized that the Son of God must remain unchangeable and immutable in becoming man not only for the sake of his divinity, but also for the sake of the Incarnation itself. If the Son of God changed in becoming man, it would no longer be the Son of God who is man. Nestorius was fully aware that the Incarnation was not like the caterpillar changing into the butterfly where the caterpillar ceases to be in the process. Moreover, Nestorius correctly desired to maintain the full and complete integrity of the human nature. Thus the incarnational process and ensuing union could not alter the human nature for then it would not be truly human. Nestorius clearly grasped that the incarnational process, the ‘becoming,’ could change neither the divine nature nor the human nature for to do so would mean that Jesus be a <i class="calibre5">tertium quid</i> – a hybrid – the confusion and mixture of divinity and humanity, thus being neither fully God nor fully man. This, Nestorius believed, is what Cyril had done.</p>
<p class="bq1">You [Cyril] do not confess that he is God in <i class="calibre5">ousia</i> in that you have changed him into the <i class="calibre5">ousia</i> of the flesh, and he is no more a man naturally in that you have made him the <i class="calibre5">ousia</i> of God; and he is not God truly or God by nature, nor yet man truly or man by nature.<sup class="calibre6">8</sup></p>
<p class="in">For Nestorius the use of the communication of idioms was symptomatic of such a notion of the Incarnation. To say that ‘the Son of God was born of Mary’ (thus her title <i class="calibre5">Theotokos</i>), or that ‘the Son of God suffered and died’ not only meant that the Son of God changed in becoming man, through mixture and confusion, but that he, as divine, was also now susceptible to human weaknesses – thirst, hunger, suffering and death. His divinity had become mutable and passible, which Nestorius, rightly <a id="page_178" class="calibre3"></a>it seems to me, held to be impossible. With his eye on Cyril, Nestorius writes against the Arians:</p>
<p class="bq1">They confuse his divine and his human [qualities], saying that the union with flesh resulted in one nature … even as the soul and the body are bound [together] in one nature in the body, suffering of necessity, whether he will or not, the sufferings of the nature which he took upon himself, as though he was not of the nature of the Father impassible and without needs…. He hungered and thirsted and grew weary and feared and fled and died; and in short they say that he naturally endured whatever appertained to the sensible nature which he assumed.<sup class="calibre6">9</sup></p>
<p class="in">Similarly, he accused Apollinarius that ‘by granting that … he [the Son] accepted sufferings, you evacuate him of impassibility and of immortality, and of being consubstantial with the Father, because he acquired a change of nature, seeing that [the Son] accepts and [the Father] accepts not [these sufferings].’<sup class="calibre6">10</sup> Being clearly aware of what the Incarnation is not, the challenge that faced Nestorius (and all of the <a id="page_179" class="calibre3"></a>Antiochenes) was how then does one properly conceive the relationship between the two natures so as to form a proper incarnational union?</p>
<p class="in">For Nestorius the divine nature and the human nature were so closely joined together that they gave rise to what he termed a ‘common prosopon of union.’ So close was their relationship that they ‘gave off’ one common appearance. The distinctive empirical qualities of each of the natures, but not the natures themselves, intermingled or were woven together into one.<sup class="calibre6">11</sup> It is this common appearance that is called ‘Christ.’ However, this ‘common prosopon,’ unlike the divinity and the humanity, has no ontological depth. It was merely the phenomenological interplay between the divine and the human qualities due to the close relationship between the two natures. Nestorius’ view of the Incarnation was similar to someone gazing up into the night sky and seeing ‘one’ very bright star only to be told by an astronomer that what one is really looking at is not one bright star, but actually two stars so closely aligned that they give off one very bright common appearance.<sup class="calibre6">12</sup> In the end, despite his best intentions and good faith, Nestorius was incapable of <a id="page_180" class="calibre3"></a>conceiving an ontological union between the divinity and the humanity so that one could actually uphold that the Son of God truly became and <i class="calibre5">is</i> man.<sup class="calibre6">13</sup> Consequently, while he was well aware that his christology could not support the traditional use of the communication of idioms, what he never perceived is that this was precisely because it did not allow for the Son of God to actually exist as man.<sup class="calibre6">14</sup> What was the cause of Nestorius’ failure?</p>
<p class="in"><a id="page_181" class="calibre3"></a>Nestorius’ conceptual starting point for conceiving the Incarnation was flawed. He knew that the humanity of Christ did not ontologically exist prior to its being joined to the divinity, nonetheless, he conceptually or mentally imagined both the divine nature and the human nature not only as distinct but also as separate prior to the union. Because of this mental imaging, he conceived the incarnational process, the ‘becoming,’ as the coming together or the joining of the two natures, but having mentally separated them prior to the joining, he could not possibly conceive them as becoming ontologically one without destroying them in the process. To make them ontologically one would demand that they be ‘smashed’ or ‘squashed’ together destroying them in the process, and so resulting in a <i class="calibre5">tertium quid</i>. Because of his initial misconception of the incarnational process, Nestorius (and all of the Antiochenes) could only conceive, in the end, a moral union between the divinity and the humanity.<sup class="calibre6">15</sup></p>
<p class="in">Nestorius was rightly aware of all the pitfalls one could encounter in conceiving the Incarnation. However, because he himself could not properly conceive of the Incarnation, he attributed to his opponents – principally Cyril of Alexandria – all the mistakes he was trying assiduously to avoid. He thought that Cyril too conceived the divinity and humanity as separate conceptual entities prior to the union, the difference being that Cyril ontologically ‘smashed’ them together forming one <i class="calibre5">ousia</i>, and in so doing destroyed both in the process. It was all too obvious to Nestorius that Cyril’s demand that Christ be one nature (μία φύσις) and his use and defence of the communication of idioms were proof that his opponent had fallen into heresy.</p>
<p class="sec"><a id="page_182" class="calibre2"></a><b class="calibre8">Cyril of Alexandria and the Communication of Idioms</b></p>
<p class="pn">Cyril of Alexandria’s christology, with his ardent defence of the communication of idioms, is crucial to the question of God’s passibility and suffering, especially in the light of the subsequent christological tradition which licensed only that God suffers exclusively as man. Because both are frequently misunderstood and misinterpreted by many contemporary theologians, I want, in this section, to clearly present and correctly interpret his thought. This, as with all that has gone before, will take time and patience. Therefore, before we examine Cyril’s christology, we must make a somewhat lengthy diversion, but one that, I believe, is essential for correctly understanding Cyril, for accurately conceiving the nature of the Incarnation, and for properly interpreting the communication of idioms.</p>
<p class="psec"><b class="calibre9"><i class="calibre5">The Soul–Body Model and the Incarnation</i></b></p>
<p class="pn">Once patristic theologians undertook a systematic enquiry into the relationship between the humanity and the divinity of Christ, they used the soul–body relationship as an apologetic and conceptual tool for understanding the Incarnation. They used it, implicitly or explicitly, in two ways. First, they employed the soul–body union to help affirm the ontological unity between the divinity and the humanity. As the soul and the body formed the one ontological reality of a human being so, similarly, the divinity and humanity formed the one ontological reality of Jesus. The soul–body union illustrated how two diverse and distinct ‘things’ (one spiritual and one material) could become and be one, and so it provided a persuasive philosophical apologetic for belief in the Incarnation. In this sense the soul–body relationship was used by way of analogy or comparison.</p>
<p class="in">Second, it was also employed, inevitably and most often simultaneously, and probably unavoidably, as an exact model for conceiving the type of relationship and for formulating the manner of the union which existed between the divinity and the humanity. It was used then not only to illustrate that the divinity and the humanity were ontologically united in the one Christ, but also as the model for designing how this ontological oneness was achieved. As the soul relates to the body and so is united to it, so the divinity relates to the humanity and so is united to it.<sup class="calibre6">16</sup></p>
<p class="in"><a id="page_183" class="calibre3"></a>Now the first use of soul–body union, as an illustrative analogy or comparison, can be legitimate. If one conceives the soul–body union as an ontological union giving rise to the one reality of a human being, then equally, the union between the divinity and the humanity is also an ontological union forming the one reality of Jesus. However, to model the relationship and the union between the divinity and the humanity after that of the soul and body is not just misleading, it is patently false. While the union between the divinity and the humanity, and the union between the soul and the body are both ontological bringing about either the one Jesus or the one human being, the relationship between the divinity and the humanity, which establishes their ontological union, differs in kind from the relationship between the soul and the body which establishes their ontological union, and so the manner or mode of their respective ontological unions differs in kind.<sup class="calibre6">17</sup> Nonetheless, within patristic christology, the soul–body relationship and union became, almost universally (Cyril being the exception, as we will see), the normative model for conceiving and articulating the Incarnation. This is the most lamentable, unfortunate, and misconceived intellectual stratagem in the entire history of christology. It not only caused all the christological misconceptions and heresies within the patristic period, but it also lies at the root of much consequent and contemporary christological error.<sup class="calibre6">18</sup> But why is the soul–body model for the Incarnation so erroneous?</p>
<p class="in"><a id="page_184" class="calibre3"></a>If one conceives the soul–body relationship as forming an ontological union, this gives rise to a new and third reality called man. To apply this model to the Incarnation necessitates that the divine and the human natures are ontologically united so as to form a new composite nature – a <i class="calibre5">tertium quid</i> – neither fully God nor fully man. Jesus may be one, but he becomes a hybrid, for the divinity and the humanity, like the body and the soul, are seen as constitutive components whose ontological fusion gives rise to a new kind of being. Moreover, because the incarnational union is modelled after the soul–body, and so conceived as a compositional union of natures, then the divine and the human attributes necessarily are predicated directly to the different natures. Thus the Son would be passible and so suffer and die within his own nature, and the humanity itself would directly assume the attributes of the Son’s nature. Thus, an unworkable and intolerable tension results. Either the divinity is diminished or the humanity is mutated. Both are unacceptable for a proper understanding of the Incarnation.</p>
<p class="in">There are numerous historical examples of the above. Arius grasped, for legitimate soteriological reasons, that there must be an ontological union between the Logos and his flesh (though he denied a human soul). But in unconsciously modeling this union after the manner of the soul–body, he realized that the Logos would thus be changed in becoming flesh and subsequently that all passible fleshly changes would reside within the very nature of the Logos. This being so, Arius had further cause, along with wanting to maintain the oneness of God, for denying the divinity of the Logos.</p>
<p class="in">Apollinarius, while upholding the full divinity of the Logos, nonetheless felt compelled to deny the human soul so as to allow for an ontological union and oneness between the Logos and his flesh. A complete divine being and a complete human being could not become one, but rather, as the soul and the body are parts from which a whole human being is composed, so the full divinity and the flesh alone are the component parts from which Christ is composed. ‘A <i class="calibre5">physis</i> is made up of the two parts, as the Logos with his divine perfection contributes a partial energy to the whole. This is also the case with the ordinary man, who is made up of two incomplete parts which produce one <i class="calibre5">physis</i> and display it under one name.’<sup class="calibre6">19</sup> Christ is <i class="calibre5">mia physis</i> because, like the soul–body, the Logos and the flesh form one organic whole with the Logos being the vivifying and governing (ήγεμονικόν) principle just as the soul is to the body. But having denied the human soul, and yet defending the full divinity, Apollinarius was logically forced either to hold that the Logos suffers in his divine nature or to underplay or deny, in order to protect the full divinity, the human passibility of Christ. He chose the latter. However, because of this dilemma, Pseudo-Athanasius argued that Apollinarius must ‘call the economy of the passion and the death and resurrection a mere appearance; or like Arius and his followers, call the Godhead of the Word passible.’<sup class="calibre6">20</sup>(Arius is obviously the more logical of the two.)</p>
<p class="in"><a id="page_185" class="calibre3"></a>Equally, while the Cappadocians defended the full divinity and the full humanity of Christ, they nonetheless conceived the union after the manner of the soul–body and so spoke, ambiguously (and in the end, in the light of Chalcedon, wrongly) of the Incarnation as a ‘mixing’ or ‘mingling’ (άνάκρασις) of the divine and the human natures. Here, as with Tertullian, they seem to be employing a Stoic understanding. Moreover, it is within a christological setting that Gregory of Nazianzus first employed within Christian theology the Neoplatonic term used to explain the relationship between the soul and the body – περιχώρησις.<sup class="calibre6">21</sup> This ‘mixing’ and ‘coinherence’ jeopardizes the integrity of the natures. Moreover, the attributes of each nature now ‘coinhere’ with one another. This results in a dubious conception the human nature’s deification, one that boarders on Docetism. According to Gregory of Nyssa the humanity is like a drop of vinegar in the sea of the divinity.<sup class="calibre6">22</sup></p>
<p class="in">Moreover, having failed to interpret correctly, as we will shortly see, Cyril’s use of the soul–body analogy, his later misguided Monophysite defenders again used it to defend the one <i class="calibre5">ousia</i> of Christ. Eutyches and some later Monophysites did what Nestorius wrongly believed Cyril did, that is, ontologically ‘squashing’ the two natures together so as to form one new nature. This tended to mean, despite the denials and best efforts of their finest theologians, such as Severus of Antioch, that the union between the divinity and the humanity formed one composite quiddity – a <i class="calibre5">tertium quid</i>.<sup class="calibre6">23</sup> Here again the communication of idioms becomes problematic for, while the Monophysites wish to maintain the integrity of the divinity, the human nature itself assumes divine qualities. By the very nature of the union, the divinity, being the stronger partner, seeps into the humanity transforming it into something less than authentically human.</p>
<p class="in">Luther, likewise, sees the Incarnation as a union of natures modelled after the soul–body forming the one existential reality of the God-Man. In the light of this, Luther interpreted the communication of idioms, in a far more radical manner than did Calvin (see below), as the predicating of the divine and the human attributes directly of the other nature, thus creating an impossible tension, for it is now God as God who suffers and it is man as man who creates. It is this unresolved tension that gave birth to modern kenoticism.</p>
<p class="in">This tension first erupted, not surprisingly, between the Lutheran theologians of Giessen and Tübingen in the years 1616-24. Both proposed <a id="page_186" class="calibre3"></a>their competing forms of kenotic christology. To the present kenotic christology continues, consciously or unconsciously, in the same erroneous manner. By conceiving the Incarnation as the union of natures, similar to that of the soul–body, Kenoticists, in contrast to the Monophysites, are forced to deprive Christ of his full divinity in order to preserve the full humanity, for in such a relationship, as the catalogue of patristic heresies confirms, a conflict between divine and human attributes is bound to arise. Because of their conception of the incarnational union, if the divine nature is not checked in some manner, the divine attributes will wash, as in Monophysitism, into the human nature making it omniscient and omnipotent, and thus not authentically human with limited knowledge and power.<sup class="calibre6">24</sup></p>
<p class="in">If one takes a more dualistic stance where the soul inhabits or is loosely related to the body, and so is not fully ontologically one with it, then within the Incarnation, while the divinity and the humanity are in some sense related to one another, they are not ontologically united, and so God <i class="calibre5">is not</i> man. Moreover, because the divinity and the humanity are not united ontologically, the communication of idioms becomes impossible. God cannot suffer because God <i class="calibre5">is not</i> man. Likewise, from this perspective, those who do advocate the communication of idioms will be accused of having united the two natures so as to form a <i class="calibre5">tertium quid</i>. There are equally historical examples of this use of the soul–body model.</p>
<p class="in">The Antiochenes use the soul–body model of the Incarnation both to espouse their own position and to argue against Cyril. They primarily employ it, not to demonstrate how Christ is one, but rather to argue for the integrity of each nature even within the incarnational union. For Theodore of Mopsuestia the soul and body are two radically different natures, but they are joined together without being confounded or converted. The natures of the soul and the body persist intact, and the division between them remains even within their union though, because of this union, they are given one name – man.<sup class="calibre6">25</sup> In <i class="calibre5">De Incarnatione</i> Theodore makes similar comments about the distinction between the soul and body and their union, and concludes:</p>
<p class="bq1">In the same way we also say here [of Christ] that there is the divine nature and the human nature and that – understanding the natures in this way – the person of the union is one. If we try to distinguish the natures we say that the man is perfect in his hypostasis and the God perfect in his. But if we want to consider the union, we say that both the natures are a single person (and hypostasis) and acknowledge that because of its union with the Godhead the flesh receives honour beyond all creatures and the Godhead fulfils everything in him.<sup class="calibre6">26</sup></p>
<p class="in">Theodoret of Cyrus likewise argues that as the soul and body are not mixed and confused in the formation of a human person but retain their <a id="page_187" class="calibre3"></a>distinct integrity, so neither are the divinity and the humanity in Christ mixed and confused, and therefore they cannot, as Cyril claims, form one composite nature.<sup class="calibre6">27</sup></p>
<p class="in">Nestorius, in his early writings, similar to Theodore and Theodoret, uses the soul–body relationship to demonstrate how the divinity and the humanity can be united while keeping their own distinct and separate properties.<sup class="calibre6">28</sup> However, in his later writings during the course of his controversy with Cyril, he rejects the use of the soul–body model. In a passage already quoted (see fn. 9), he reverses its use to criticize the Arians. The Arians claim that the union of the divinity and the humanity ‘resulted in one nature … even as the soul and the body are bound (together) in one nature’ and so the Son is deprived of his divine impassibility and must necessarily suffer, within his own nature, hunger, thirst, and death.<sup class="calibre6">29</sup></p>
<p class="in">In a similar fashion he criticizes Cyril. If the union between the divinity and the humanity is like that of the soul and the body, then the divinity must be passible and so suffer. ‘As the soul naturally gives perception to the body, so by means of this perception it experiences the sufferings of the body, so that the perception of the sufferings of the body is given by the soul and to the soul; for it is passible.’<sup class="calibre6">30</sup></p>
<p class="in">There is no doubt that Calvin believed Jesus to be the Son of God existing as man. He upheld that the Son was fully God and that he assumed an authentic and full humanity in becoming man.<sup class="calibre6">31</sup> As long as he limited himself to interpreting the Incarnation from within a scriptural context he was in accord with the ancient Christian tradition. However, once he entered into the ontology of the Incarnation he became somewhat confused and ambiguous, and he did so precisely because he interpreted the act of incarnation as the union of natures modeled after the union of the soul and body. Calvin used the soul–body union not <a id="page_188" class="calibre3"></a>only to show that the divinity and humanity are united so as to constitute the one reality of Christ as the soul–body constitute one man, but also as a means for understanding the communication of idioms, and so the relationship between the divinity and the humanity. While the soul–body constitute one man, yet they retain their distinct properties. Some human properties are proper solely to the soul and some are proper solely to the body. Yet, some properties are applied to the whole man. In this instance ‘the properties of the soul are transferred to the body, and the properties of the body to the soul.’ ‘Such modes of expression intimate both that there is in man one person formed of two compounds, and that these two different natures constitute one person.’ In like fashion, the hypostatic union for Calvin, is ‘the union which of two natures constitutes one person.’ From the New Testament Calvin realizes that this ‘one person’ is the Son, but here, because of his use of the soul–body model, this ‘one person’ now appears no longer to be ‘the Son,’ but rather, in a manner reminiscent of the Antiochenes, to be ‘the Christ’ who comes to be out of the union of natures just as one human person is constituted by the union of soul and body. Moreover, the scriptures ‘sometimes attribute to him [Christ] qualities which should be referred specially to his humanity, and sometimes qualities applicable peculiarly to his divinity, and sometimes qualities which embrace both natures, and do not apply specially to either. This combination of a twofold nature in Christ they express so carefully, that they sometimes communicate them with each other, a figure of speech which the ancients termed ίδιωμάτων κοινωνία (a communication of properties).’ Because Calvin interprets the incarnational act as the union of natures after the manner of the soul–body union, he has lost the authentic use of the communication of idioms, where all attributes, whether divine or human, are applied to one and the same person of the Son. While Calvin wants the properties of each nature truly, and so ‘not causelessly,’ to be predicated of the other since Christ is one, yet he must simultaneously speak of this transferral as done ‘figuratively’ or ‘improperly’ in order to protect the integrity of each nature. The soul–body model has placed Calvin in a christological bind. In the end, it would seem, what Calvin terms ‘a communication of properties’ is merely a linguistic device used to highlight the close union of natures, and so the oneness of Christ.<sup class="calibre6">32</sup></p>
<p class="in"><a id="page_189" class="calibre3"></a>Two recent defences of the traditional understanding of the Incarnation labour under the same misconception as those above. Both T.V. Morris and R. Swinburne propose a ‘two mind’ or ‘divided mind’ model for the Incarnation. For both, while the divine mind or consciousness in Christ has access to the human mind or consciousness, the latter does not have access to the former, unless the former allows it. This obviates the problem of how the Son of God can be omniscient and all-good, and yet the historical man Jesus can possess limited human knowledge and free will, and so be tempted, etc. Thus, while the Son of God is associated with the human mind of Jesus and so knows what he is thinking and willing, and while the Son can influence the human mind of Jesus so that he will think and will what is proper, yet the Son allows the human mind to function normally. The human mind remains, for the most part, segregated, with its own distinct sphere of activity.</p>
<p class="in">I have multiple concerns with both Morris and Swinburne, not the least of which is Swinburne’s notion that God is ‘a soul’ and it is this ‘divine soul’ that acquires a human body with a human manner of thinking (human brain and senses) in the Incarnation, but I will limit myself to what I consider their fundamental error in conceiving the Incarnation. Both still conceive the incarnational act as a union of natures similar to that of the soul–body, and it is for this reason that the conflict between incompatible or mutually exclusive attributes arises. Their solution to this pseudo-problem is to offer a form of adoptionism, that is, the divine Son of God does not come to exist as a man and so is conscious of himself and thinks in a human manner, but rather the Son adopts or acquires the mind of the human Jesus. Within traditional christology the one person of the Son does have a human mind and a divine mind, but this is the result of the Son actually coming to exist as man. For Morris and Swinburne it is the union of minds in Christ that effects the ‘Incarnation’ – it is within the union of minds that ‘the Incarnation’ is actually established. While both wish to uphold the traditional understanding of the Incarnation, it is difficult to see how this union is an ontological union, that is, how this union of minds can establish the fact that the Son actually <i class="calibre5">exists</i> as man. Swinburne compounds the problem by giving his form of adoptionism an Apollinarian twist in that the divine soul replaces the human soul and merely adopts or acquires the use of a human body – human brain and senses. It would seem that the fundamental problem within his christology is his faulty anthropology where the normal human soul’s relation to the body is no different from that of the divine soul’s relation to its body. A human being is but a soul that has adopted a body.<sup class="calibre6">33</sup></p>
<p class="in">The verdict of this rather lengthy examination is clear. However one uses the soul–body as a model for the Incarnation it is completely inadequate, misleading, and even false, and equally then for properly interpreting the communication of idioms. The Incarnation establishes a <a id="page_190" class="calibre3"></a>whole different kind of relationship and union, and, as a result, the communication of idioms must be conceived differently as well.</p>
<p class="psec"><b class="calibre9"><i class="calibre5">The Communication of Idioms and the Oneness of Christ</i></b></p>
<p class="pn">We now return to Cyril, and we do so to argue that he conceives the Incarnation and the communication of idioms in an entirely different manner than was just discussed above. However, it is only in contrast to the above that his christology, and most immediately his use of the soul–body relationship, becomes manifest.<sup class="calibre6">34</sup></p>
<p class="in">The hermeneutical key for unlocking Cyril’s christology is the communication of idioms for it is the very same key he himself employed to unlock the mystery of the Incarnation. It was, in accordance with my earlier stated principle, the inner christological logic imbedded within the communication of idioms which permitted, and even propelled, Cyril to grasp, conceptualize, and articulate the three incarnational truths which must be maintained for a proper understanding of the Incarnation. Through faith Cyril knew that the communication of idioms demanded that it be truly the full divine Son of God who is man, that it be truly a complete man that the Son of God is, and thus that the Son of God actually does exist as man.<sup class="calibre6">35</sup> Moreover, in the process of clarifying the mystery of the Incarnation through his defense of communication of idioms, the proper use and rendering of the communication of idioms was itself corroborated and so sanctioned. Cyril’s christology befittingly depicts a man of faith passionately seeking understanding.<sup class="calibre6">36</sup></p>
<p class="in"><a id="page_191" class="calibre3"></a>For Cyril then, the communication of idioms demanded that Christ be one in two ways. First, it demanded that Jesus be one existing reality or being – one entity – for if he were not one, then one could not authentically predicate of him divine and human attributes. Second, the one existential reality of Jesus must be, moreover, the one and same divine Son of God existing as incarnate – as man – for if it were not the one Son existing as man then it would not be the one and same Son who was <i class="calibre5">homoousios</i> with the Father and who was born, suffered, died, and rose as man. It is simply this double conception of Jesus’ oneness – that he is one entity and that the one entity that Jesus is, is the one Son existing as man – which Cyril found implanted within the very heart of the communication of idioms and which he continually attempted to conceptualize and articulate.<sup class="calibre6">37</sup></p>
<p class="psec"><a id="page_192" class="calibre3"></a><b class="calibre9"><i class="calibre5">The</i> Mia Physis <i class="calibre5">Formula</i></b></p>
<p class="pn">This is readily apparent at the very onset of the controversy in Cyril’s championing the <i class="calibre5">mia physis</i> formula, that is, that Jesus is ‘the one nature of the Word incarnate’ (μία ϕύσις του̑ λόγου σεσαρκωμένη), for it contains his dual concern about the oneness of Christ. That is why Cyril clung to it with such tenacity. The first question, one that bears directly on Christ being one entity and on our previous examination of the soul–body relationship, is: What does Cyril mean by <i class="calibre5">mia physis</i>? I have argued extensively elsewhere, and will develop more fully here, that by <i class="calibre5">mia physis</i> Cyril is not saying that Christ is one nature or essence (<i class="calibre5">physis</i>), in the sense of quiddity, as if the divine nature and the human nature were ontologically united, through mixture and confusion, so as to form a common third nature (quiddity) which would be neither fully divine nor fully human. This is how Nestorius and the Antiochenes interpreted the formula, and how the later Monophysites, having misunderstood Cyril, would interpret it. Rather, Cyril primarily used <i class="calibre5">mia physis</i> to emphasize that Christ is one being or reality – one entity.</p>
<p class="in">The clue to this interpretation is in the comparison Cyril made between the soul–body union and that found within the Incarnation. He primarily and almost exclusively used the soul–body union, which normally appears immediately either before or after the <i class="calibre5">mia physis</i> formula, to illustrate that as the soul and the body of a human being are ontologically united to form one reality or entity – the human being – so the Son of God is ontologically united to the humanity to form the one reality of Jesus. For the sake of clarity and demonstration, Cyril must be quoted at some length.</p>
<p class="bq1">As for our Saviour’s statements in the Gospels, we do not divide them out to two subjects (ύποστάσεσι) or persons (προσώποις). The one, unique Christ has no duality though he is seen as compounded in inseparable unity out of two (έκ δύο) differing elements in the way that a human being, for example, is seen to have no duality but to be one (εἱ̑ς) consisting of the pair of elements, body and soul.<sup class="calibre6">38</sup></p>
<p class="in">Because Cyril spoke of Christ being one nature (<i class="calibre5">mia physis</i>) formed out of two (<i class="calibre5">ek duo</i>), the Antiochenes held that he could only mean that the divinity and humanity were united so as to form a <i class="calibre5">tertium quid</i>. While the ‘out of two’ is ambiguous and will be clarified by Chalcedon, it is nonetheless evident that Cyril did not mean what the Antiochenes thought he meant. First, as the Gospels bear witness, there is one subject or person in Christ. Second, the reason there is one subject or person is that the divinity and the humanity are united in the one person so as to form the one nature of Jesus in the sense of one entity (not quiddity), similar to the way the soul and body form the one entity of a human being. The comparison is used only to denote the oneness and not the manner of the oneness. As Cyril states:</p>
<p class="bq1">The nature (ϕύσις) of the Incarnate Word himself (ή αύτου̑ του̑ λόγου σεσαρκωμένου) is after the union now conceived as one (μία) just as <a id="page_193" class="calibre3"></a>will reasonably be conceived in regard to ourselves too, for man is one, compounded of unlike things, soul I mean and body.<sup class="calibre6">39</sup></p>
<p class="pn">Or again, in defending his use of the <i class="calibre5">mia physis</i> formula, Cyril writes:</p>
<p class="bq1">May we illustrate the case from the composition which renders us human beings? We are composed out of (έκ) soul and body and observe two different natures (δύο ϕύσεις), body’s and soul’s; yet the pair yields a single united human being, and composition out of two natures does not turn the one man into two men but, as I said, produces a single man, a composite of soul and body.<sup class="calibre6">40</sup></p>
<p class="pn">Or again:</p>
<p class="bq1">Take the normal human being. We perceive in him two natures (δύο ϕύσεις): one that of the soul, a second that of the body. We divide them, though, merely in thought accepting the difference as simply residing in fine-drawn insight or mental intuition; we do not separate the natures out or attribute a capacity for radical severance to them, but see that they belong to one man so that the two are two no more and the single living being is constituted complete by the pair of them. So though one attributes the nature of manhood and of Godhead to Emmanuel, the manhood has become the Word’s own and together with it is seen as one Son.<sup class="calibre6">41</sup></p>
<p class="in">The sole point Cyril wishes to make within the above quotations is that as a human being is one entity so Christ is one entity. In no way does he use the manner of the relationship between the soul and body or the mode of union established between the soul and the body as a model for the manner of the relationship between the divinity and the humanity or for the mode of the union established between the divinity and the humanity. He is merely making a comparison in order to draw a conclusion – Christ is one.<sup class="calibre6">42</sup> Thus, to insist that Christ is <i class="calibre5">mia <a id="page_194" class="calibre3"></a>physis</i> simply affirms that he is one entity and not that he is one quiddity.<sup class="calibre6">43</sup></p>
<p class="in"><a id="page_195" class="calibre3"></a>Likewise when Cyril speaks of the union being ‘natural’ (ἕνωσις ϕυσική) or ‘according to nature’ (κατά ϕύσιν), he is making the same point. The union is ‘natural’ or ‘according to nature’ not in the sense that the divine and the human natures are compositionally united so as to form a third nature in the sense of quiddity, but in the sense that it brings about the one ontological entity of Christ. Just as the union of soul and body is ‘natural’ forming the one entity of man so the union of the divinity and the humanity is natural bringing about the one Christ.<sup class="calibre6">44</sup></p>
<p class="in">While these quotations confirm that Cyril employed <i class="calibre5">mia physis</i> to declare Christ to be one entity and not one quiddity, it is equally clear that he used the term <i class="calibre5">physis</i> in two different senses. For he also simultaneously speaks of the soul and body, and the divinity and the humanity as each being a <i class="calibre5">physis</i> in the sense of nature or quiddity. This equivocal, and so ambiguous, use of the term <i class="calibre5">physis</i> obviously caused, and still causes, confusion and misunderstanding.</p>
<p class="in">Assuming then that <i class="calibre5">mia physis</i>, for Cyril, designates that Jesus is one entity, and that he affirms this in order to confirm the communication of idioms, for only if the Son of God <i class="calibre5">truly is</i> man, and so one with his humanity, can the attributes of each nature be predicated of him, what then does the remainder of the formula tell us? The answer to this question bears upon Cyril’s second concern about Christ’s oneness and the manner of that oneness. The remainder of the formula designates <a id="page_196" class="calibre3"></a>who/what the one reality of Jesus is. The one reality or entity (μία ϕύσις) is that of the Word incarnate (του̑ λόγου σεσαρκωμένη). Contained within the <i class="calibre5">mia physis</i> formula then, something Cyril instinctively realized and appreciated, but which others found too subtle to grasp, was the notion of one subject or person and the manner of the one subject’s existence. The subject (the who) of the <i class="calibre5">mia physis</i> (of the one entity) is the Word. The manner or mode of the Word’s existence as <i class="calibre5">mia physis</i> (as one entity) is as man. This is why Cyril could write: ‘Accordingly all the sayings contained in the Gospels must be referred to a single person (ένὶ προσώπῳ), to the one incarnate subject of the Word (ύποστάσει μιᾳ̑ τῃ̑ του̑ λόγου σεσαρκωμένη).’<sup class="calibre6">45</sup> Here the prevalent term <i class="calibre5">physis</i> has been substituted by the terms <i class="calibre5">prosopon</i> and <i class="calibre5">hypostasis</i> which acquire the more Chalcedonian sense of ‘person’ or ‘subject’. The reason Cyril can make such a substitution is that, for him, the one entity of Christ (<i class="calibre5">physis</i>) is none other than the one divine person/subject (<i class="calibre5">prosopon/hypostasis</i>) of the Son existing as incarnate.<sup class="calibre6">46</sup> The <i class="calibre5">mia physis</i> formula, for Cyril, embodied all three truths needed for a proper understanding of the Incarnation, and this is why he loved it. It said it all. However, as the above exposition probably demonstrates, it may try to do too much. It requires a ‘Cyrilian insight.’ Something his detractors, past and present, lack.</p>
<p class="psec"><a id="page_197" class="calibre3"></a><b class="calibre9">‘<i class="calibre5">Becoming as Personal/Existential</i></b></p>
<p class="pn">Moreover, in the course of expounding the meaning of the formula, Cyril was able to clarify the true nature of the incarnational ‘becoming’ and the subsequent union between the Son/Word of God and his humanity, and this is why he is willing, in the end, to lay it aside. This he did by designating that the union of the natures takes place within the person of the Word. The incarnational ‘becoming’ and ensuing union is ‘according to the person’ (καθ’ ύπόστασιν). ‘We affirm this: that the Word personally [according to the person] united to himself flesh (σάρκα … ένώσας ό λόγος έαυτῳ̑ καθ’ ύπόστασιν).<sup class="calibre6">47</sup> This was the heart of his beloved formula, but now stated more precisely, more explicitly, and possibly, more accurately. Here we witness a true christological breakthrough, one that springs from the communication of idioms and, simultaneously, precisely defines it.</p>
<p class="in">In designating the incarnational ‘becoming’ as <i class="calibre5">kath hypostasin</i> Cyril has clarified and established three points concurrently. First, he has distinguished between the person (the who) and the person’s nature (the manner of the who’s existence). It is one and the same person, who existed eternally as God, who now exists as man. Second, he has clarified the exact nature of the incarnational ‘becoming’. The Incarnation does not involve the changing, mixing, or confusing of natures (as in the soul–body model), but rather the person of the Word taking on a new mode or manner of existence, that is, as man. There is a change or newness in the mode of the existence of the Son, though not a change or newness within the natures. The Son now newly exists as man. Third, by correctly conceiving and articulating that it is the person of the Son who exists as man, Cyril, as we will fully examine momentarily, equally has validated the communication of idioms. Cyril’s understanding of the Incarnation is what I have come to refer to as a personal/existential conception. Jesus is the <i class="calibre5">person</i> of the Son <i class="calibre5">existing</i> as a man.<sup class="calibre6">48</sup> While the Incarnation remains a mystery, Cyril, in accordance with authentic doctrinal development, has clarified more exactly what the mystery is – it is truly the person of the divine Son who truly exists as a true man.</p>
<p class="in">In the light of Antiochene concerns and Leo’s <i class="calibre5">Tome</i> and in response to Eutyches’ monophysitism, the Council of Chalcedon (<small class="calibre10">AD</small>451) stated that the Son was ‘made known in two natures’ (έν δύο ϕύσεσιν) as opposed to stating that the Son was composed ‘out of’ (έκ δύο) two natures, thus clarifying the remaining ambiguities within Cyril’s christology. <a id="page_198" class="calibre3"></a>Nonetheless, Cyril’s stamp on the Council’s Creed is unmistakable, and it is his understanding of the Incarnation that bears its <i class="calibre5">imprimatur</i>. To read the Chalcedonian Creed except through the eyes of Cyril is to misread it.</p>
<p class="in">Three times the Council employs the Cyrilian phrase ‘one and the same’ (ἕνα καὶ τòν αύτόν) and five times speaks of ‘the same’ (τòν αύτόν). Who it is who is ‘one and the same’ and ‘the same’ is none other than the person of the Son. It is one and the same Son who is ‘perfect in Godhead’ and ‘perfect in manhood, truly God and truly man … consubstantial (όμοούσιον) with the Father in Godhead, and the same consubstantial (όμοούσιον) with us in manhood.’ It is the same Son, who existed eternally with the Father, who came to exist as man. In so speaking the Council thoroughly endorsed Cyril’s personal/existential understanding of the Incarnation.</p>
<p class="in">Moreover, the Council declared that the two natures were united ‘without confusion, without change, without division, without separation’ (ἀσυγχύτως, ἀτρέπτως, ἀδιαιρέτως, ἀχώρίστως). Why are the natures not confused and changed? Why are they undivided and unseparated? Is not this an arbitrary jumble of words? How is it possible to hold both sets of seemingly contradictory concepts together in an intelligible manner? Is the Council here merely making negative statements in order to ward off various heresies, or did it also have a positive theologically informed conception of the Incarnation which authorized it to do so? I believe it is the latter. The Council grasped, in agreement with Cyril, that the natures are not confused and changed because the incarnational act, the ‘becoming,’ is not the compositional union of natures which would demand change and confusion. Rather, the incarnational act, the ‘becoming,’ equally in agreement with Cyril, is the person of the Son uniting to himself a human nature so as to exist personally as man. Thus the natures are not divided or separated, but find their unity in the one person of the Son. As the Council states: ‘the difference of the natures being by no means removed because of the union [the reason being that the union is not a union of natures], but the property of each nature being preserved and harmonized (συντρεχούσης) in one <i class="calibre5">prosopon</i> and one <i class="calibre5">hypostasis</i>.’ This too testifies to the Council’s personal/existential understanding of the Incarnation.</p>
<p class="in">It is this understanding of the Incarnation which provided, at last, the christological justification for and a proper reading of the communication of idioms. However, as I have argued, it was not a proper understanding of the Incarnation which gave rise to the communication of idioms, for it was used long before a proper understanding was fully articulated, but rather it was the communication of idioms which gave rise to a proper understanding of the Incarnation.<sup class="calibre6">49</sup></p>
<p class="in"><a id="page_199" class="calibre3"></a>Here we perceive that the Incarnation is the culmination and summit of biblical revelation. Throughout this study I have emphasized that the foundational mystery of all biblical revelation is that God is present to the world and active within history, in all his wholly otherness, without losing his wholly otherness in so doing. In the Incarnation the wholly other divine Son of God truly becomes an authentic man without losing his wholly otherness as God. It is precisely his wholly otherness as God which gives significance to the Son’s incarnate existence. If it were not truly the Son, <i class="calibre5">homoousios</i> with the Father, who became man, then the whole import of his being man, <i class="calibre5">homoousios</i> with all men, would be forfeited.<sup class="calibre6">50</sup> It is precisely the communication of idioms that accentuates and intensifies these truths. He who is truly God actually lives an authentic human life without ceasing to be truly God.<sup class="calibre6">51</sup></p>
<p class="psec"><b class="calibre9"><i class="calibre5">The Communication of Idioms and the Suffering of God</i></b></p>
<p class="pn">The long patristic tradition, sanctioned, as Cyril grasped, by the Creed of <a id="page_200" class="calibre3"></a>Nicea, employed the communication of idioms. What the tradition had never clearly achieved, as witnessed in the Antiochene rejection, was a proper theological rationale for its use, and thus a precise understanding of the manner in which these attributes where predicated of the Son. Cyril in providing the christological basis for its use equally clarified the manner in which it was used and he did so in two ways. Negatively, he recognized that the human attributes were not predicated of the divine nature, nor in turn, were the divine attributes predicated of the human nature. Such an understanding of the communication of idioms would mean that, in some manner, the natures where confused and mixed and so changed within the incarnational process. This is how Nestorius interpreted its use, and if it had been the correct interpretation, he would have been justified in rejecting it. Positively, Cyril grasped and explicitly stated, for the first time, that the attributes were predicated not of the natures, but of the person, for the Incarnation is not the compositional union of natures but the person of the Son taking on a new manner or mode of existence.<sup class="calibre6">52</sup> Because the incarnational ‘becoming’ is <i class="calibre5">kath hypostasin</i>, according to the person, it can actually be said then that the person of the Son of God is truly born, grieves, suffers and dies, not as God, but as man for that is now the new manner in which the Son of God actually exists.<sup class="calibre6">53</sup></p>
<p class="in"><a id="page_201" class="calibre3"></a>To call Mary <i class="calibre5">Theotokos</i> does not mean that she gave birth to God as God, ‘no, it means that he [the Son] had fleshly birth because he issued from woman for us and for our salvation having united humanity to himself personally (ένώσας έαυτῳ̑ καθ’ ύπόστασιν τò άνθπώπινον).’ Equally, when it is said that the Son of God suffered and died, it is not meant ‘that God the Word suffered blows, nail-piercings or other wounds in his own nature (the divine is impassible because it is incorporeal) but what is said is that since his own created body suffered these things he himself “suffered” for our sake, the point being that within the suffering body was the Impassible (ὁ ἀπαθὴς ἐν τῳ̑ πάσχοντι σώματι). We interpret his dying along exactly comparable lines’.<sup class="calibre6">54</sup> In the twelfth of his infamous anathemas Cyril provocatively declared:</p>
<p class="bq1">Whoever does not acknowledge God’s Word as having suffered in flesh, being crucified in flesh, tasted death in flesh and been made first-born from the dead because as God he is Life and life-giving shall be anathema.<sup class="calibre6">55</sup></p>
<p class="in">Here, at last, having put all the christological pieces in their proper place, we can discern the full import of the communication of idioms for the question of God suffering. First, who is it who truly experiences the authentic, genuine, and undiminished reality of human suffering? None other than the divine Son of God! He who is one in being (<i class="calibre5">homoousion</i>) with the Father. What is the manner in which he experiences the whole reality of human suffering? As man! It is actually the Son of God who lives a comprehensive human life, and so it is the Son who, as man, experiences all facets of this human life, including suffering and death.<sup class="calibre6">56</sup></p>
<p class="in">The Son is the exclusive active subject in what he experiences and in <a id="page_202" class="calibre3"></a>what he does, and the manner or mode under which he experiences and acts is as man.</p>
<p class="in">But it is here that the critics will immediately protest that, after all is said and done, this is precisely the problem with Cyril and the subsequent christological tradition. It does not allow the human suffering to be experienced by the Son of God in his divinity, and so falls short of allowing God truly to suffer. Did not Cyril himself adamantly refuse to allow suffering to touch the divinity of the Son?</p>
<p class="bq1">He [the Son] suffered without suffering…. If we should say that through conversion or mutation of his own nature into flesh, it would be in all ways necessary for us even against our will to confess that the hidden and divine nature was passible. But if he has remained unchanged albeit he has been made man as we, and it be a property of the heavenly nature that it cannot suffer, and the passible body has become his own through the union: He suffers when the body suffers, in that it is said to be his own body, he remains impassible in that it is truly his property to be unable to suffer<sup class="calibre6">57</sup></p>
<p class="in">Provoked as it is by the fundamentally erroneous conviction that God as God suffers, this criticism is postulated upon the false premise that the Son of God must suffer within his divine nature in order for the suffering to be theologically and soteriologically significant. However, because of these mistaken assumptions, this criticism actually ignores the inner christological and soteriological logic contained within the communication of idioms, and so neglects its true import.</p>
<p class="in">The communication of idioms, as understood by Cyril and the authentic tradition, does wish to uphold that the fully divine Son of God did indeed suffer and die. This is precisely what Nestorius wanted to deny and Cyril wanted to vindicate. This is exactly why Cyril asserts that he who is impassible as God actually is passible as man. The Impasssible suffered.<sup class="calibre6">58</sup> To say, in accordance with Cyril and the Christian tradition, <a id="page_203" class="calibre3"></a>that ‘the Impassible suffers’ is not, then, to be incoherent, but to state the very heart of the incarnational mystery. First, the term ‘the Impassible’ guarantees that it is actually God, in all his wholly transcendent otherness as God, who suffers, and not ‘God’ in some mitigated or semidivine state. The fact that God does not lose his wholly transcendent impassible otherness in so suffering enhances to the extreme the import of the suffering, for it means that the Son who is incapable of suffering as the wholly other God is precisely the same one who is actually suffering as man. But it is at this juncture that those who advocate a suffering God miss the logic and so the heart of the communication of idioms. The communication of idioms, secondly, equally ensures that it is truly human suffering that the Son of God experiences and endures.<sup class="calibre6">59</sup></p>
<p class="in"><a id="page_204" class="calibre3"></a>Even if one did allow the Son of God to suffer in his divine nature, this would negate the very thing one wanted to preserve and cultivate. For if the Son of God experienced suffering in his divine nature, he would no longer be experiencing human suffering in an authentic and genuine human manner, but instead he would be experiencing ‘human suffering’ in a divine manner which would then be neither genuinely nor authentically human. If the Son of God experienced suffering in his divine nature, then it would be God suffering as God <i class="calibre5">in a man</i>. But the Incarnation, which demands that the Son of God actually exists as a man and not just dwells in a man, equally demands that the Son of God suffers <i class="calibre5">as a man</i> and not just suffers divinely in a man. If one wishes to say in truth that the Son of God actually experienced and knew what it was like to be born, eat, sleep, cry, fear, grieve, groan, rejoice, suffer, die, and most of all, love <i class="calibre5">as a man</i>, and it seems this is precisely what one does want to say, then the experience and knowledge of being born, eating, sleeping, crying, fearing, grieving, groaning, rejoicing, suffering, dying, and again most of all, loving must be predicated of the Son of God solely and exclusively <i class="calibre5">as a man</i>.<sup class="calibre6">60</sup> Thus, to replace the phrase ‘the Impassible suffers’ <a id="page_205" class="calibre3"></a>with ‘the Passible suffers’ immediately purges the suffering of all incarnational significance. The very reading of the phrase rings hollow.</p>
<p class="in">It may be helpful to illustrate this understanding of the communication of idioms with an example. Allow me to use an example that I pose to my students, which has come to be known in some circles as ‘Dr Weinandy’s carrot example.’</p>
<p class="in">Jesus goes to Martha’s, Mary’s, and Lazarus’ home for dinner. Martha serves as a starter (to use the English term) raw carrots with garlic dip (a yet to be discovered American culinary invention). Jesus ate the carrots. Who was it who ate the carrots? Who was the acting subject? It was the Son of God who ate the carrots. Was he eating the carrots as God or as man? Obviously, he was eating the carrots as man. God as God cannot eat carrots for he does not have teeth, a mouth, a stomach, etc. Lazarus also ate the carrots, but unfortunately he ate a rotten carrot and died of food poisoning. Four days later Jesus returned and raised Lazarus from the dead. Who was it who raised Lazarus from the dead? It was the Son of God who raised Lazarus from the dead. But did he raise Lazarus from the dead as God or as man? At this juncture there is silence among the students. Inevitably the more pious students first break the silence by saying that Jesus raised Lazarus from the dead ‘as God.’ I remain silent. Then some brave soul, usually a girl, will hesitantly whisper, almost inaudibly, ‘as man.’ That is precisely the correct answer. Within the Incarnation the Son of God never does anything as God. If he did, he would be acting as God <i class="calibre5">in a man</i>. This the Incarnation will never permit. All that Jesus did as the Son of God was done <i class="calibre5">as a man</i> – whether it was eating carrots or raising someone from the dead. He may have raised Lazarus from the dead by his divine power or, better, by the power of the Holy Spirit, but it was, nonetheless, as man that he did so. Similarly, the Son of God did not suffer as God in a man, for to do so would mean that he was not a man. The Son of God suffered as a man.</p>
<p class="in">Nonetheless, if the Son of God suffers as man, why does this suffering not affect his divinity given that the Son of God is equally God? Here we enter the heart of the mystery. While the mystery of the Incarnation, by its very nature, remains, the answer lies in the fact that as God the Son is not deprived of any good which would cause him to suffer as God. If the Son of God, as God, were deprived of some good which would cause him to suffer as God, it would mean, as I argued in previous chapters, that he is actually no longer God. Strange as it may seem, but not paradoxically, one must maintain the unchangeable impassibility of the Son of God as God in order to guarantee that it is actually the divine Son of God, one in being with the Father, who truly suffers as man. As man the divine Son of God was deprived, as are we, of human goods which did cause him, like us, to suffer.</p>
<p class="in"><a id="page_206" class="calibre3"></a>This is the marvellous truth of the Incarnation. God from all eternity may have known, within his divine knowledge, what it is like for human beings to suffer and die, and he may have known this perfectly and comprehensively. But until the Son of God actually became man and existed as a man, God, who is impassible in himself, never experienced and knew suffering and death as man <i class="calibre5">in a human manner</i>. In an unqualified manner one can say that, as man, the Son of God had experiences he never had before because he never existed as man before – not the least of which are suffering and death. This is what humankind is crying out to hear, not that God experiences, in a divine manner, our anguish and suffering in the midst of a sinful and depraved world, but that he actually experienced and knew first hand, as one of us – as a man – human anguish and suffering within a sinful and depraved world.</p>
<p class="in">This is what a proper understanding of the Incarnation requires and affirms, and this is what the communication of idioms so remarkably, clearly, and even scandalously safeguards, advocates, and confesses. The eternal, almighty, all-perfect, unchangeable, and impassible divine Son, he who is equal to the Father in all ways, actually experienced, as a weak human being, the full reality of human suffering and death. What was an infamy to the Docetists, to Arius, and to Nestorius was for Cyril and the subsequent Christian tradition the glory and grandeur of the gospel. Even among those who advocate a suffering God, the Incarnation is still a scandal, for, while with the best of intentions, having locked suffering within God’s divine nature, they have, in so doing, locked God out of human suffering.</p>
<p class="in">I hope that this rather lengthy exposition of the Incarnation and the communication of idioms has clarified, but not dissolved, the mystery of each, and in so doing intensified their significance with regard to the question of God’s suffering. However, I have not finished. I still want to enhance, in a threefold manner, the suffering of the Son of God as man.</p>
<p class="sec"><b class="calibre8">The Son’s <i class="calibre12">Esse Personale</i></b></p>
<p class="pn">The first way that I wish to enhance the communication of idioms, and so its significance, is to specify the philosophical nature of the relationship between the Son of God and his humanity. We have seen thus far that Cyril grasped and Chalcedon sanctioned a personal/existential understanding of the Incarnation. The incarnational ‘becoming’ is not the compositional union of natures which would demand change and mutation within both the divinity and the humanity, but rather the person of the Son taking on a new mode of existence as man. Such an understanding allows the Son to remain immutable as God in becoming man so as to ensure that it is truly God, in the fullness of his divinity, who is man, and equally ensures that the humanity is not changed, thus safeguarding that it is truly man that the Son of God is. This personal/existential conception provides the christological warrant for the communication of idioms. All the divine and human attributes can properly be predicated of one and same person, the Son, for he exists <a id="page_207" class="calibre3"></a>personally as God and as man. This personal/existential conception contains within it a singular kind of relationship (for the Incarnation is a singular event) between the person of the Son and his humanity, and though Cyril and Chalcedon did not explicitly treat this philosophical issue, Aquinas did.</p>
<p class="in">When examining Aquinas’ understanding of the trinity of persons as subsistent relations in act and their one nature as <i class="calibre5">ipsum esse</i>, I stressed that both concepts connote pure actuality – <i class="calibre5">actus purus</i>. I also argued that because the trinity of persons are subsistent relations fully in act, in harmony with their one nature being fully in act, they require no mediating actions in order to relate something to themselves, but have the singular ability to relate something to themselves as they are in themselves in an immediate, dynamic, intimate, and enduring manner. Being subsistent relations fully in act, the persons of the Trinity need not surmount or actualize any relational potential within themselves in order to form relations. They are utterly relational for they simply are relations.</p>
<p class="in">The act of creation, we saw, exemplifies this. The persons of the Trinity, in the act of creation, immediately, dynamically, intimately, and enduringly relate creation to themselves and in so doing creation comes to be and continues to exist. This type of relationship is referred to as a mixed relationship for it specifies a relationship between two different ontological orders whereby the logical term is actually related to the real term because the real term is related to the logical term as it actually is. In the act of creation the trinity of persons (the logical term) are actually related to creatures (the real term) for the creatures only come to be and continue to exist by being related to the persons of the trinity as they are.</p>
<p class="in">For Aquinas, the Incarnation also establishes a mixed relation.<sup class="calibre6">61</sup> In the act of ‘becoming man’ the humanity is not related to the Son by some mediating action on the part of the Son, that is, the Son performs no specific action, different from the act that he is as Son, which would relate the humanity to himself. If the act of ‘becoming man’ were through some mediating act on the part of the Son, that very act would not only entail a change in the Son in becoming man, but also, and more importantly here, would diminish the relationship between the person of the Son and his humanity. The very mediatory character of the action, while entailing a relationship, keeps the humanity from actually being related to the Son as the Son actually exists.<sup class="calibre6">62</sup> In contrast, Aquinas argued that the incarnational act is precisely the Son relating the humanity to his very person as Son, ‘to the personal being (<i class="calibre5">ad esse personale</i>) of the <a id="page_208" class="calibre3"></a>Logos’.<sup class="calibre6">63</sup> Because the Son subsists, in his <i class="calibre5">esse personale</i>, as a relation fully in act, he is able to relate the humanity to himself as he is. Here there is no mediatory action involved which would hinder and diminish the relationship. Rather, in so conceiving the incarnational relationship, Aquinas first guarantees that it is truly the Son of God who is man for the Son is not changed in becoming man, and can actually only establish such a relationship because he is immutably a subsistent relation fully in act. This is why Aquinas refers to the Son as the logical term of the relationship. But second, since the Son, as the logical term, is not changed in the relationship, such a relational conception specifies the closeness and depth of the humanity’s relation to the Son. The humanity, as the real term of the incarnational relationship, is so closely related to the Son as the Son is in his very <i class="calibre5">esse personale</i> that the Son actually comes to exist as a man. The relationship does not then denote even a change in the humanity which might render it less than fully human, but rather specifies that the humanity comes into existence and is united to the person of the Son in the most immediate and utterly intimate manner, so immediate and intimate that it as man that the Son now exists.</p>
<p class="in">In conceiving the incarnational relationship in such a manner, Aquinas not only gives greater philosophical precision to the personal/existential understanding of the Incarnation, he equally provides, although he does not elucidate this, a more intense perception to the communication of idioms. Because the humanity is united to the very person of the Son, as the Son exists as God in his <i class="calibre5">esse personale</i>, we see that it is truly the divine Son, in the very <i class="calibre5">esse personale</i> which defines him as the Son, who actually experiences the full reality of being human. There is no mediatory action between the Son and his humanity which would diminish or abridge the Son’s experience as man. The Son, precisely as he exists divinely as Son, is the exclusive experiencing and active subject within his humanity. Thus, because the humanity is united to the very <i class="calibre5">esse personale</i> of the Son so as to allow the Son to exist as an authentic man, it can be said in truth that the Son, at the very heart of what defines him as Son – his own distinctive divine <i class="calibre5">esse personale</i> – was born, rejoiced, grieved, suffered, and died.<sup class="calibre6">64</sup></p>
<p class="sec"><a id="page_209" class="calibre2"></a><b class="calibre8">The Human ‘I’ of Jesus</b></p>
<p class="pn">Because the humanity is ontologically related to the very <i class="calibre5">esse personale</i> of the Son so as to allow the Son actually to exist as man, the second way that I wish to enhance the communication of idioms is by proposing that such a union entitles the Son, as man, to possess an authentic human ‘I’. While such a proposal may sound Nestorian, I believe it is firmly founded within Cyril’s, Chalcedon’s, and Aquinas’ personal/existential understanding of the Incarnation.<sup class="calibre6">65</sup></p>
<p class="in">On the ‘personal’ side of this equation, traditional Thomistic christology, in accordance with Cyril’s and Chalcedon’s insistence that Christ is one person (<i class="calibre5">prosopon</i> or <i class="calibre5">hypostasis</i>), has maintained that there is only one ‘I’ corresponding to the one divine person of the Son. It correctly perceived that if the ‘I’ is not identified as the person of the Son, there would be no true incarnation. Jesus would just be another man. However, what the tradition has not clearly distinguished is the identity (the <i class="calibre5">prosopon</i> or <i class="calibre5">hypostasis</i> – the ‘who’) of the one ‘I’ and the existential mode under which the one ‘I’ exists.</p>
<p class="in">Cyril argued and Chalcedon demanded that the identity of Jesus be that of the divine Son. They employed the terms <i class="calibre5">prosopon</i> and <i class="calibre5">hypostasis</i> to designate Jesus’ ontological identity, who he is. To the question: <i class="calibre5">Who is</i> the man Jesus? The answer must be that <i class="calibre5">he is the Son of God</i>. The Son is the subject, as the communication of idioms illustrates and requires. Thus, on the ‘personal’ side of the personal/existential equation, the Son is identified as the person or subject (the <i class="calibre5">prosopon</i> or <i class="calibre5">hypostasis</i>).</p>
<p class="in">Now the whole point in asserting that Jesus’ identity (who he is) is that of the Son is to guarantee that it is as man that the Son is so identified. If one asked: Under what manner or mode of existence is Jesus identified as the Son? The answer must be: as man. In this sense, from the ‘existential’ side of the equation, the Son has assumed a human identity. It is within his existence as man that the Son comes to be identified as the divine Son. If the Son is man and has identified himself as a man, then, it seems to me, that he exists, as incarnate, totally within the parameters or boundaries of all that is human. Thus the Son of God not only has a human body, soul, intellect, will, and emotions, etc., but equally he also has an integral human ‘I,’ a psychological centre within which all of these are expressed and experienced. The human ‘I’ of Jesus is the human psychological self-consciousness of the divine Son. He thought, spoke, and acted as well as underwent all his experiences from within the limits of his human ‘I.’ When Jesus said ‘I,’ it was truly the Son of God saying ‘I’ in a fully authentic <a id="page_210" class="calibre3"></a>human manner. What the Incarnation demands is that the identity (the who – the <i class="calibre5">prosopon</i> or <i class="calibre5">hypostasis</i>) of this human ‘I’ be truly that of the divine Son, but it is, nonetheless, within that human ‘I’ that the Son is so identified.<sup class="calibre6">66</sup></p>
<p class="in">In contrast then to the later tradition, but nonetheless in keeping with Cyril, Chalcedon, and Aquinas, I would argue that Jesus does have one ‘I’, but it is the human ‘I’ of the Son. The identity of the Son and of the human ‘I’ are, as Chalcedon insists, one and the same.<sup class="calibre6">67</sup></p>
<p class="in"><a id="page_211" class="calibre3"></a>Now the significance of all this, for our present discussion, is that, while it is truly the Son who is the active subject of all experiences and actions, he is the active subject within or, better, as a genuine and authentic human ‘I.’ Thus, when the Son of God rejoices, grieves, suffers, and dies, he does so from within his human self-conscious ‘I.’ When Jesus groans within himself, it is the Son of God groaning within an authentic human self-consciousness. As a genuine human ‘I’ the Son of God can say: ‘I am groaning.’ When Jesus cries in anguish: ‘I thirst,’ it is the Son of God who thirsts, but he is truly experiencing that anguish of thirst within his own human ‘I.’ Most of all when Jesus cries out: ‘My God, my God, why have you forsaken me!’ It is within his human self-consciousness, within the anguish of his own human ‘I,’ that the Son of God experiences the total abandonment of his loving Father. The human ‘I,’ in that it is identified as the human ‘I’ of the divine Son, ensures both the total authenticity of the human experiences and that it is truly the Son who experiences them. Moreover, when we attribute all human experiences, especially suffering and death, to the Son, in accordance with the communication of idioms, we are predicating them of the one Son, but we are doing so as he experienced them within his own authentic human ‘I,’ and so enhancing the depth and reality of such predication.</p>
<p class="sec"><b class="calibre8">In the Likeness of Sin ful Flesh</b></p>
<p class="pn">The third way I wish to enhance the communication of idioms is to state that in the Incarnation the Son of God did not assume some generic humanity, but our own sinful humanity.<sup class="calibre6">68</sup> ‘The Word became flesh <a id="page_212" class="calibre3"></a>(σάρξ)’ (Jn 1:14), and thus shared in all of our human weakness. The Father sent ‘his own Son in the likeness of sinful flesh’ (Rom. 8:3), and he even ‘made him to be sin who knew no sin’ (1 Cor. 5:21).<sup class="calibre6">69</sup> While he never sinned personally (see Heb. 4:15, 1 Pet. 2:22, Jn 8:46, 1 Jn 3:5), and while he did not have an inner propensity to sin (concupiscence), yet his humanity was of the race of fallen Adam. Being of Adam’s fallen race, Tertullian aptly stated that he bore ‘the birthmark of sin,’ and thus, by necessity, he experienced the effects of having assumed such a humanity.<sup class="calibre6">70</sup> Like all human beings living within the fallen human condition, the Son of God, as man, truly experienced hunger and thirst, sickness and sorrow, temptation and harassment by Satan; being hated and despised, he experienced fear and loneliness; on the cross he even underwent death and separation from God.</p>
<p class="in">While this notion lay dormant within the church’s theological tradition, it is, I believe, absolutely essential for a complete understanding of the Incarnation and for founding, as we will see shortly, an adequate and comprehensive soteriology. Here I only want to emphasize that by assuming an Adamic ‘sinful humanity,’ the Son did not quarantine himself from our sinful and suffering plight, but instead immersed himself within it. This again intensifies the significance of the communication of idioms, for the human experiences of the Son were neither anaesthetized by his divinity nor desensitized by some generic or pedigreed humanity which differed from our own. Rather, this fallen humanity was united immediately and intimately to the Son as he exists personally as God, in his <i class="calibre5">esse personale</i>. Moreover then, his human ‘I’ was the human ‘I’ of a humanity contaminated by our sinful condition. The Son of God, within the unmediated immediacy of his own human ‘I,’ <a id="page_213" class="calibre3"></a>experienced the totality of suffering entailed in being affiliated with the fallen race of Adam.</p>
<p class="sec"><b class="calibre8">Conclusion</b></p>
<p class="pn">Throughout this study I have attempted to be faithful to the biblical notion of God and of his relation to the created order. To do so I have argued that God is the Wholly Other who relates to and acts within the created order as the Wholly Other without losing his total otherness in so doing. For God to lose his complete otherness in relating to and acting within the created order would mean that it is no longer the Wholly Other who is so relating and acting, but some mitigated form of his divine being.</p>
<p class="in">In this chapter we have discerned that this biblical notion of God and of his relation to the created order finds its foremost expression in the Incarnation. The Son of God, in the fulness of his divinity, has actually come to exist as an authentic man without losing the fulness of his divinity in so doing. He who is unconditionally transcendent as God is the very same one who, in his unconditional transcendence, is unconditionally immanent as man.</p>
<p class="in">Moreover, this in turn guarantees that the Son, in all his transcendent otherness, is the sole acting and experiencing subject as man. Within the immanent created order of time and history, the Son of God lives a fully and unqualifiedly human life, and he does so as he exists as God. If the Son of God, even in the slightest manner, ‘lost’ some of his divinity in so living a full human life, then it would no longer be the divine Son who lived a full human life. Nor must the Son of God, in even the slightest manner, ‘lose’ the fulness of human life, for then it would no longer be an authentic human life that the Son of God lived. In accordance with our three incarnational truths: He who is truly God truly is truly man. This is what the Incarnation demands and what the communication of idioms so candidly and scandalously expresses – the Impassible suffers!</p>
<p class="ntcon">1  While I focus, due to the topic at hand, on the suffering of Christ in these introductory remarks, the importance of the resurrection and the new life in the Holy Spirit will also become evident in the following chapters.</p>
<p class="ntnlf">2  For some recent studies on New Testament christology as well as on the patristic christology which developed from it see, for example, Bauckham, <i class="calibre5">God Crucified: Monotheism and Christology in the New Testament;</i> R.E. Brown, <i class="calibre5">An Introduction to New Testament Christology</i> (New York: Paulist Press, 1994); J.D.G. Dunn, <i class="calibre5">Christology in the Making</i> (Philadelphia: Westminster Press, 1980); Galot, <i class="calibre5">Who Is Christ?</i>; Grillmeier, <i class="calibre5">Christ in Christian Tradition</i>, Vol. I; W. Kasper, <i class="calibre5">Jesus the Christ</i> (London: Bums &amp; Oates, 1975); R.A. Kereszty, <i class="calibre5">Jesus Christ: Fundamentals of Christology</i> (New York: Alba House, 1991); LH. Marshall, <i class="calibre5">Jesus the Saviour</i> (Downer Grove: InterVarsity Press, 1990); C.F.D. Moule, <i class="calibre5">The Origin of Christology</i> (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1977); G. O’Collins, <i class="calibre5">Interpreting Jesus</i> (London: Geoffrey Chapman, 1983); G. O’Collins, <i class="calibre5">Christology</i> (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1995); L. Sabourin, <i class="calibre5">Christology</i> (New York: Alba House, 1984); R. Schnackenburg, <i class="calibre5">Jesus in the Gospels</i> (Louisville: Westminster John Knox Press, 1995); W.M. Thompson, <i class="calibre5">The Jesus Debate</i> (New York: Paulist Press, 1985).</p>
<p class="ntnlf">3  See Aquinas, <i class="calibre5">ST</i>, III, 16, 1.</p>
<p class="ntnlf">4  This traditional conciliar understanding of the Incarnation is, I believe, not merely in conformity with and inadverse to the New Testament, but one that is actually and positively intrinsic to its proclamation, and so, under the guidance of the Holy Spirit, necessarily developed from it.</p>
<p class="ntnl">R. Bauckham is correct when he argues that the common distinction between the ‘functional’ christology of the New Testament and the ‘ontic’ christology of the Fathers is completely inadequate for explaining the christological development, and is not true to biblical revelation. He holds that the very first Christians believed that Jesus had a unique divine identity, and that the New Testament itself then placed Jesus within the unique identity of the one God of the Old Testament. Thus, belief in Jesus’ divinity was not a gradual step by step process, but rather ‘it was a step which, whenever it was taken, had to be taken simply for its own sake and <i class="calibre5">de novo</i>…. In my view, the New Testament evidence is best explained if this step was taken very early as the fundamental step on which all further christological development then rested.’ <i class="calibre5">God Crucified</i>, p. 28. For Bauckham’s arguments see pp. 25–42. Also see A.E. McGrath, <i class="calibre5">The Genesis of Doctrine: A Study in the Foundation of Doctrinal Criticism</i> (Grand Rapids: Eerdmans, 1997), pp. 58–65.</p>
<p class="ntnl">This may also be the place to make what I find an interesting observation. Not every theologian who espouses a suffering God denies that Jesus is truly God in accordance with the conciliar tradition, but every theologian who denies that Jesus is truly God, and there are many today, espouses a suffering God. The reason for this is quite obvious. Having abandoned a traditional understanding of the Incarnation, which would uphold that God truly suffers as man, these theologians have no other recourse than to place the suffering within God himself.</p>
<p class="ntnlf">5  The heart of Arius’ difficulty was that he misconceived the Incarnation. Like the later Apollinarius he saw the Incarnation as the Son uniting himself to flesh/body alone, without a soul, in a substantial compositional union after the manner of the soul’s union with the body within human beings. (This will be examined more fully later.) He did this to ensure a true ontological union. However, in conceiving the union in such a manner, the experiences of the flesh were placed within the very nature of the Son. Arius rightly perceived that this would entail that the Son of God changed his nature in becoming man and so was passible within his new fleshly existence. He thus concluded that, since God is immutable and impassible, the Son could not be God. Arius also denied the divinity of Son because he could not conceive how God could be one and the Son be God at one and the same time. See Grillmeier, <i class="calibre5">Christ in Christian Tradition</i>, Vol. 1, pp. 219–32; and Weinandy, <i class="calibre5">Does God Change?</i>, pp. 16–20.</p>
<p class="ntnlf">6  Athanasius’ historic trinitarian insight is that the Father does not alone embody the Godhead, which as the early history of trinitarian thought confirms, tends toward tritheism and inevitably demands that the Son and the Spirit be subordinate to the Father, but that what the one God is is the Father begetting the Son. See Weinandy, <i class="calibre5">Does God Change?</i>, pp. 10–16. For a recent and excellent article on Athanasius’ doctrine of the Trinity, see P. Widdicombe, ‘Athanasius and the Making of the Doctrine of the Trinity,’ <i class="calibre5">Pro Ecclesia</i> 6/4 (1997):456–78. As I have argued elsewhere, the Cappadocians in their trinitarian thought never fully grasped Athanasius’ momentous insight. Their trinitarian theology still bears the vestiges of Platonic emanationism. See Weinandy, <i class="calibre5">The Father’s Spirit of Sonship</i>, pp. 6–15.</p>
<p class="ntnlf">7  While Ignatius does not systematically address the theological issues raised by the docetic denial of Jesus’ real humanity, he is suprisingly clear, at this early date, that Jesus, while truly God (ό θεός) (see <i class="calibre5">Ephesians</i>, greeting, 18; <i class="calibre5">Romans</i>, greeting, and <i class="calibre5">Polycarp</i> 8), was indeed truly a man who actually was born, suckled, ate, suffered and died (see <i class="calibre5">Trallians</i>, 9–10 and <i class="calibre5">Smyrnaens</i>, 1–5). He is one of the first, if not the first, to accentuate these truths through his use of the communication of idioms. He does not hesitate to speak of ‘divine blood’ (<i class="calibre5">Ephesians</i> 1) and ‘the passion of my God’ (<i class="calibre5">Romans</i> 6). In poetic fashion he writes: ‘There is only one Physician – Very flesh, yet Spirit too; Uncreated, and yet born; God-and-Man in One agreed, Very-Life-in-Death indeed, Fruit of God and Mary’s seed; At once impassible and torn by pain and suffering here below: Jesus Christ, whom as our Lord we know.’ <i class="calibre5">Ephesians</i> 7, see also <i class="calibre5">Polycarp</i> 3. E.T., <i class="calibre5">Early Christian Writings</i>, ed. M. Staniforth (London: Penguin, 1968). Ignatius would not have hesitated to give full assent to the decree of Chalcedon. Actually, if he had been of a more philosophical mind, he could have written it.</p>
<p class="ntnl">For a study that addresses the use of the communication of idioms in some of the earliest Fathers, see M. Slusser, <i class="calibre5">Theopaschite Expressions in Second-Century Christianity as Reflected in the Writings of Justin, Melito, Celsus and Irenaeus</i> (Oxford: D.Phil. Dissertation, 1975). Slusser, commenting on Justin and Irenaeus, writes: ‘Belief in God’s impassibility does not exclude theopaschite language; it only emphasizes its importance.’ P. 125. See also his ‘The Scope of Patripassianism,’ <i class="calibre5">Studia Patristica</i>, Vol. 17/1, ed. E.A. Livingstone (Oxford: Pergamon Press, 1982), pp. 169–75.</p>
<p class="ntnl">It should also be noted that while patripassianism (early third century) was condemned, the real issue was not that the Modalists attributed suffering to the Father, but rather that they failed to distinguish adequately between the Father and the Son. Patripassianism was primarily a trinitarian and not a christological heresy. Because the Son was seen as merely a different temporary mode of expression of the Father, it could be said that the Father became man and so suffered. Patripassianism was therefore condemned not out of an excessive fear of ascribing suffering within the Incarnation, but out of a desire to assure that it was the Son, and not the Father, who became man and so suffered.</p>
<p class="ntnl">The argument that ultimately defeated Apollinarius was primarily soteriological. Gregory of Nazianzus stated it in its classic form: ‘What is not assumed, is not healed’ (τὸ ἀπρόσληπτον, ἀθεράπεντον), (<i class="calibre5">Epistola</i>, 101).</p>
<p class="ntnlf">8  <i class="calibre5">Liber Heraclidis</i>. E.T., <i class="calibre5">The Bazaar of Heracleides</i>, C.R. Driver and L. Hodgson, eds (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1925), p. 16. See also pp. 26–27. What we find in Nestorius is a threefold argument for the immutability of God. 1. God, being all perfect, is immutable in himself, and thus cannot change. 2. He must be immutable in relation to the Incarnation, i.e., if God changes in becoming man he who is ‘man’ is no longer God but that which he has changed into. 3. The Son must be immutable for the sake of the human nature, i.e., a change in the Son in becoming man effects a change in the humanity as well, rendering it no longer an authentic humanity.</p>
<p class="ntnlf">9  <i class="calibre5">Liber Heraclidis</i>, pp. 8–9.</p>
<p class="ntull">10  <i class="calibre5">Liber Heraclidis</i>, p. 39. See also pp. 91–95. Very perceptively R. Wilken argues that Arius is the real culprit behind the Nestorian controversy. Both the Antiochenes and the Alexandrians held that the Logos/Son was truly God as Nicea had declared, but they radically diverged within their respective biblical exegesis as to how best to defend such a belief. The Arians denied that the Son was truly divine precisely because the New Testament predicates human attributes of him. Thus he must be passible and so be a creature. In response to this charge, the Antiochenes interpreted such biblical passages as applying solely to the man Jesus and not to the divine Logos. The Alexandrians, on the other hand, argued that such passages referred to the Logos only in so far as he existed as man. Wilken argues that the Antiochenes, therefore, perceived the title <i class="calibre5">Theotokos</i> as a Trinitarian issue – How could the Son be truly divine if he was born? Whereas the Alexandrians perceived the title as a christological issue – If Mary was not <i class="calibre5">Theotokos</i>, how could one say that the Logos was truly man? See R. Wilken, Tradition, Exegesis, and the Christological Controversies,’ <i class="calibre5">Church History</i>, 34 (1965):123–45. For excellent expositions of Cyril’s scriptural exegesis also see Wilken, ‘St Cyril of Alexandria: The Mystery of Christ in the Bible,’ <i class="calibre5">Pro Ecclesia</i> 4 (1995):454–78 and ‘St Cyril of Alexandria: Biblical Expositor,’ <i class="calibre5">Coptic Church Review</i> 19/1–2 (1998):30–41.</p>
<p class="ntnl">Nestorius’ christology has grown in stature in recent years, principally because of his defense of the complete humanity of Christ. The irony, an irony that Nestorius would hardly appreciate, is that those theologians who most sing his praises are the same ones who most question the divinity of Jesus and/or the immutability and impassibility of God. But, as Wilken’s article strongly suggests, it is these truths that lay at the heart of Nestorius’ christology, and it is these that he was most eager to defend. J.J. O’Keefe is absolutely correct when he states: ‘Nestorius worried far more about the impassibility of God than he did about the humanity of Jesus.’ ‘Impassible Suffering? Divine Passion and Fifth-Century Christology,’ <i class="calibre5">Theological Studies</i> 58 (1997):52. See also pp. 40–41. See also his ‘Kenosis or Impassibility: Cyril of Alexandria and Theodoret of Cyrus on the Problem of Divine Pathos,’ <i class="calibre5">Studia Patristica</i>, ed. E.A. Livingston, (Leuven: Peeters, 1997), Vol. 32, pp. 358–65. Even such a staunch defender of Nestorius as M. Anastos acknowledges this point. See ‘Nestorius was Orthodox,’ <i class="calibre5">Dumbarton Oaks Papers</i> 16 (1962):140. See also H. Chadwick, ‘Eucharist and Christology in the Nestorian Controversy,’ <i class="calibre5">Journal of Theological Studies</i> 2 (1951):158; R.A. Greer, ‘The Image of God and the Prosopic Union in Nestorius’ <i class="calibre5">Bazaar of Heracleides</i>’ in <i class="calibre5">Lux in Lumine</i>, ed. R.A. Norris (New York: Seabury Press, 1966), p. 46; Pelikan, <i class="calibre5">The Christian Tradition: A History of the Development of Doctrine 1</i>, p. 231.</p>
<p class="ntull">11  For Nestorius each nature (ϕύσις) is comprised of an essence or substance (οὐσία) making it ‘what’ it is. ϒπόστασις, which he employed less often, designates that complex of properties which individuates and distinguishes ‘things’ of the same nature. Thus each οὐσία possesses its own distinct ὐπόστασις. The term πρόσωπον refers to those external or empirical properties or attributes which outwardly manifest and so reveal a particular individual concrete nature or substance. Each nature (<i class="calibre5">physis</i>) in Christ is then composed of its own distinct <i class="calibre5">ousia</i> (substance) making it what it is; its own distinct hypostasis individuating the particular expression of its substance; and its own distinct prosopon which manifests empirically its distinct and individual <i class="calibre5">ousia</i> and hypostasis.</p>
<p class="ntnl">For discussions of Nestorius’ and/or Cyril’s terminology and concepts, see Anastos, ‘Nestorius Was Orthodox,’ pp. 123–27; Greer, ‘The Image of God and the Prosopic Union in Nestorius,’ pp. 47–48; Grillmeier, <i class="calibre5">Christ in Christian Tradition</i>, Vol. 1, pp. 457–63, 478–83, 501–7; Kelly, <i class="calibre5">Early Christian Doctrines</i>, pp. 313, 318; R.V. Sellers, <i class="calibre5">The Council of Chalcedon</i> (London: SPCK, 1961), pp. 138–39, fn. 7; J. McGuckin, <i class="calibre5">St Cyril of Alexandria: The Christological Controversy</i> (Leiden: E.J. Brill, 1994), pp. 138–45; H.E.W. Turner, ‘Nestorius Reconsidered,’ <i class="calibre5">Studia Patristica</i>, Vol. 13, ed. E.A. Livingstone (Berlin: Akademie Verlag, 1975), p. 313.</p>
<p class="ntnl">All scholars acknowledge that a major contributing factor to the untidiness of the Nestorian controversy lay in the use and meaning of terminology. Both sides were employing like terminology, such as <i class="calibre5">physis, ousia, hypostasis</i>, and <i class="calibre5">prosopon</i>, but employing them with different nuances. However, it would be erroneous, as Anastos does, simply to reduce the Nestorian controversy to a battle over the meaning and use of words, as if a clarification of the meaning of terms would have resulted in Nestorius and Cyril happily acknowledging that, in the end, they were really saying the same thing. (See Anastos, ‘Nestorius was Orthodox,’ p. 120.) The problem was not that Nestorius and Cyril were using different words for the same concepts, but rather they were using the same words for different concepts. What was at stake was not simply how one articulated the Incarnation, but also, and more so, how one conceived the Incarnation. While a helpful and necessary clarification of terminology did come, especially after the Council of Ephesus (<small class="calibre11">AD</small>431) with the Formula of Union (<small class="calibre11">AD</small>433), the deeper issue was that of first attaining conceptual clarity about the nature of the Incarnation. Only then could the terms assume and convey their rightful meaning.</p>
<p class="ntull">12  Nestorius can even speak of the compenetration and perichoresis of the divine and the human <i class="calibre5">prosopa</i>, that is, that the qualities of the divine <i class="calibre5">ousia</i> and human <i class="calibre5">ousia</i> coalesce forming the one common <i class="calibre5">prosopon</i>. However, since only the term <i class="calibre5">ousia</i> denotes an ontological reality, the common <i class="calibre5">prosopon</i> is merely the phenomenological interplay between the two <i class="calibre5">ousiai</i>. While Anastos vigorously argues for Nestorius’ orthodoxy in that Nestorius, as does the Council of Chalcedon, speaks of ‘one person’ and ‘two natures,’ what he fails to grasp is that, within Nestorius’ conception of the union, there is no ontological ‘who’ (subject) contained within the one <i class="calibre5">prosopon</i> of union. If one asks: ‘Who is the <i class="calibre5">prosopon</i> of union?’ Nestorius and Anastos would answer ‘Christ.’ But ‘Christ,’ as Nestorius and Anastos admit, is but the result of the close alignment of the natures so as to display the one common <i class="calibre5">appearance</i>. The term ‘Christ’ does not designate an ontological reality/subject, but merely a common <i class="calibre5">appearance</i>. See Anastos, ‘Nestorius was Orthodox,’ pp. 127–40. G.B. Bebis speaks of the <i class="calibre5">prosopon</i> of union as being ‘<i class="calibre5">a point of contact</i>, an external mark upon which the external characteristics or the properties and the qualities can meet or can concur.’ “‘The Apology” of Nestorius: A New Evaluation,’ <i class="calibre5">Studia Patristica</i>, Vol. 11, ed. F.L. Cross (Berlin: Akademie Verlag, 1972), p. 109. K.P. Wesche states that ‘The <i class="calibre5">Prosopon</i> in which is conjoined the divine and human <i class="calibre5">prosopa</i>, itself is not a person: it is not personal with its own personal center. It is merely an impersonal ontological framework within which two personalized natures come into conjunction.’ ‘The Union of God and Man in Jesus Christ in the Thought of Gregory of Nazianzus,’ <i class="calibre5">St Vladimir’s Theological Quarterly</i> 28/2 (1984):87. Similarly, Grillmeier, <i class="calibre5">Christ in Christian Tradition</i>, Vol. 1, p. 454. Nestorius could be termed a phenomenological Monophysite in that the qualities or appearances, but not the realities, of each nature are mixed or coalesce into one. See <i class="calibre5">The Bazaar of Heracleides</i>, pp. 141–50, 207–8, 218–19.</p>
<p class="ntull">13  R.A. Greer maintains that Nestorius holds for a union of wills between the divinity and the humanity in Christ. ‘It could hardly be more evident that the prosopic union is what might be called a voluntarist as opposed to a substantial union.’ ‘The Image of God and the Prosopic Union in Nestorius’ <i class="calibre5">Bazaar of Heracleides</i>’ in <i class="calibre5">Lux in Lumine</i>, p. 56. While H.E.W. Turner is sympathetic to Nestorius, he agrees that Nestorius only provides, despite his intentions, a voluntarist union. See ‘Nestorius Reconsidered,’ <i class="calibre5">Studia Patristica</i>, Vol. 13, pp. 308–9, 317, 321. R. Chestnut believes that Nestorius’ christology is the way forward for contemporary theology, but does not hesitate to conclude that his christology proposes a unity of wills or activity between the divinity and the humanity. See ‘The Two Prosopa in Nestorius’ <i class="calibre5">Bazaar of Heracleides,’ Journal of Theological Studes</i>, N.S. 29/2 (1978):393–409. For similar accounts see also A. Grillmeier, <i class="calibre5">Christ in Christian Tradition</i>, Vol. 1, pp. 446–63, 501–19; J.N.D. Kelly, <i class="calibre5">Early Christian Doctrines</i>, pp. 31–7; and J. McGuckin’s excellent account in <i class="calibre5">The Christology of Cyril of Alexandria</i>, pp. 126–74.</p>
<p class="ntnl">J.J. O’Keefe believes that ‘Antiochene Christology, far from being a low Christology, actually worried more about protecting the Son’s divinity than it worried about the details of Jesus’s human life. As a Christology, it was fairly “high.” Indeed, it is striking how infrequently Jesus is mentioned; the term of preference is “Christ.”’ Thus he argues that Antiochene christology is similar to much contemporary christology which denies that Jesus is the divine Son of God, but is merely ‘a man, with a profound sense of God, who points the way to the transcendent mystery beyond himself.’ However, this means that, like the Antiochenes, God has no direct contact with the world and human suffering. Impassible Suffering? Divine Passion and Fifth-Century Christology’, <i class="calibre5">Theological Studies</i>, 58 (1997):59–60. Similarly, R.A. Norris states that the Antiochenes have fixed an unbridgeable ‘gulf’ ‘between non-generate and generate modes of being.’ ‘The Problem of Human Identity in Patristic Christological Speculation,’ <i class="calibre5">Studia Patristica</i>, Vol. 17/1, ed. E.A. Livingstone (Oxford: Pergamon Press, 1982), p. 157.</p>
<p class="ntull">14  The only legitimacy Nestorius could give to the communication of idioms was to interpret it as a christological linguistic device or word game in that it accented the close relationship between the disparate natures. Since the <i class="calibre5">prosopon</i> of the divinity coalesced with the <i class="calibre5">prosopon</i> of the humanity giving rise to the common <i class="calibre5">prosopon</i>, one could attribute what belonged to the divine nature to the human nature and vice versa, but this attribution could only be at the level of the common <i class="calibre5">prosopon</i>, that is, on the phenomenological or empirical level, and not at the level of the natures. As M. Anastos, commenting on Nestorius’ understanding of the communication of idioms, states: ‘He does not mean of course that such an exchange [of attributes] was actually effected between the two natures, but rather between God the Logos and the human in Christ, through their prosopa.’ ‘Nestorius was Orthodox,’ p. 136. What Nestorius and Anastos have failed to grasp is that, while the attributes of each nature cannot be predicated of the other nature, for such would demand the confusion of natures and so the demise of each nature, yet the attributes of each nature must be predicated of one and the same subject, for one and the same subject (the Logos) exists as God and man.</p>
<p class="ntull">15  For a more detailed exposition and analysis of my understanding of Nestorius’ christology, see Weinandy, <i class="calibre5">Does God</i> Change?, pp. 34–46. G.L. Prestige’s words are very apt at this point:</p>
<p class="bq1f">A permanently valid doctrine of Christ could only be forthcoming from men who somehow made the unity of His person the ultimate ground for their thought about the duality of His natures, taking their start from what is single, not trying to reduce two incompatible concepts to identity. <i class="calibre5">Fathers and Heretics</i> (London: SPCK, 1968), p. 132.</p>
<p class="ntnl">This, as we will see shortly, is exactly what Cyril did.</p>
<p class="ntull">16  U. Lang has shown that Origen implicitly used the soul-body model within his christology. Moreover, at the Synod of Antioch (<small class="calibre11">AD</small>268/9) the Originist bishops used it in their argumentation against the adoptionism of Paul of Samosata. Paul refused to acknowledge that God could be united to a human nature as the soul is united to the body, and so denied that the Logos was truly God. See <i class="calibre5">Studies in the Christology of John Philoponus and its Place in the Controversies Over Chalcedon</i> (Oxford: D.Phil. Dissertation, 1999), <a href="13_Chapter06.xhtml" class="calibre3">Chapter 6</a>. While the Synod rightly upheld the divinity of the Logos, yet Paul, as we will see shortly, rightly understood that the Logos could not be united to a human nature in the same manner as a soul is united to a body without jeopardizing his divinity. Here we have a case where the Synod had the right answer for the wrong reasons and ‘the heretic’ had the wrong answer for the right reasons.</p>
<p class="ntnl">In the West Tertullian may be the first to employ the soul-body model. While he does not explicitly state that he is using the soul-body union as a model for his christology, yet scholars have shown that his conception of the incarnational union is patterned after the Stoic <i class="calibre5">krasis</i> doctrine. For the Stoics there can be a union of distinct substances in which there is a total mutual compenetration of bodies, but without each losing their distinct properties. Tertullian saw the union of soul and body in such a manner (see <i class="calibre5">De Anima</i>, 52, 3). Similarly, Jesus is composed of two substances. Thus, he can speak of ‘<i class="calibre5">homo deo mixtus</i>,’ and that in Jesus there is a ‘<i class="calibre5">miscente</i> [mingling] <i class="calibre5">in semetipso hominem et deum</i>’ (<i class="calibre5">Apologia</i>, 21, 3). See also <i class="calibre5">Adversus Marcionem</i>, 2, 27 and <i class="calibre5">De Carne Christi</i>, 15, 6. Obviously, Tertullian is attempting to conceive a union between the divinity and the humanity whereby he can retain their integrity and simultaneously assert that Christ is one. The tensions within such a conception are evident. The problem, as we will see, is that by modeling the Incarnation on the soul-body union Tertullian has misconceived it at the onset. See Grillmeier, <i class="calibre5">Christ in Christian Tradition</i>, Vol. 1, pp. 129–31, and R. Cantalamessa, <i class="calibre5">La Cristologia di Tertulliano</i> (Paradosis 18), Fribourg, 1962.</p>
<p class="ntull">17  While Aquinas agrees that the soul-body union can be used to illustrate the ontological oneness of Christ, he rightly perceives that there is no similarity (‘<i class="calibre5">quantum ad hoc non attenditur similitudo</i>’) between the ontological union of soul and body and that of the divinity and humanity (<i class="calibre5">ST</i>, III, 2, 1, ad 2). See the whole of III, 2, 1 as well as <i class="calibre5">SCG</i>, IV, 35, 9 and 41, 2 and 4.</p>
<p class="ntull">18  In a former article, while I distinguished the use of the soul-body union for illustrating how Christ is one from that of portraying the manner of the incarnational union, I referred to both as the soul-body analogy. I was wrong in so doing (see ‘The Soul-Body Analogy and the Incarnation: Cyril of Alexandria,’ <i class="calibre5">Coptic Church Review</i> 17 (1996):59–66). The first use of the soul-body union is more an analogical use – by way of illustration or comparison. As a human being is one composed of soul and body so similarly Christ is one ‘composed’ of divinity and humanity. The second is more strictly speaking an exact model for the Incarnation, for here the manner or mode of ‘the composition’ is seen as the same. Moreover, even to use the soul-body union as an analogy or a comparison for the manner or type of incarnational union would be misleading and wrong. There is no similarity between the way the soul is united to the body and the way the divinity is united to the humanity. I am indebted to P. Parvis for helping me distinguish between ‘analogy’ and ‘model’ in this instance.</p>
<p class="ntull">19  <i class="calibre5">De Unione</i>, 5.</p>
<p class="ntull">20  <i class="calibre5">Contra Apollinarem</i>, 2, 12.</p>
<p class="ntull">21  See <i class="calibre5">Epistola</i>, 101 and <i class="calibre5">Oratio</i>, 38, 13. See K.P. Wesche, ‘The Union of God and Man in Jesus Christ in the Thought of Gregory of Nazianzus,’ <i class="calibre5">St Vladimir’s Theological Quarterly</i> 28/2 (1984):83–98.</p>
<p class="ntull">22  See <i class="calibre5">Adversus Apollinarem</i>, 42.</p>
<p class="ntull">23  For example, the extreme Monophysite bishop Julian of Halicarnassus in the sixth century held that Jesus’ humanity was so purified of sin and shielded from its effects that it was incorruptible, impassible, and immortal from birth (<i class="calibre5">Aphthartodocetae</i>). Leontius of Byzantium and Severus of Antioch argued against him. See Leontius of Byzantium, <i class="calibre5">Contra Nestorianos et Eutychianos II</i>. See also U. Lang, <i class="calibre5">Studies in the Christology of John Philoponus</i>, <a href="13_Chapter06.xhtml" class="calibre3">Chapter 6</a>; J. Meyendorff, <i class="calibre5">Christ in Eastern Christian Thought</i> (New York: St Vladimir’s Press, 1975), pp. 88–89; and Meyendorff, <i class="calibre5">Byzantine Theology</i>, pp. 157–58.</p>
<p class="ntull">24  For a fuller discussion of Luther’s christology with its various schools and kenotic christology see especially Weinandy, <i class="calibre5">Does God Change?</i>, pp. 101–23; and also <i class="calibre5">In the Likeness of Sinful Flesh</i>, pp. 8–11.</p>
<p class="ntull">25  See <i class="calibre5">Adversus Apollinarem</i>, 4.</p>
<p class="ntull">26  <i class="calibre5">De Incarnatione</i>, VIII, 62. ET, Grillmeier, <i class="calibre5">Christ in Christian Tradition</i>, Vol. 1, p. 438.</p>
<p class="ntull">27  See <i class="calibre5">Eranistes</i>, 2.</p>
<p class="ntull">28  See <i class="calibre5">Nestoriana</i>, 197f. and 330–31.</p>
<p class="ntull">29  See <i class="calibre5">The Bazaar of Heracleides</i>, pp. 8–9.</p>
<p class="ntull">30  <i class="calibre5">The Bazaar of Heradeides</i>, p. 172. See M. Anastos, ‘Nestorius was Orthodox,’ 126–27; R. Chestnut, ‘The Two Prosopa in Nestorius’ <i class="calibre5">Bazaar of Heradeides,’ Journal of Theological Studies</i>, NS 29/2 (1978):403–4; H.E.W. Turner, ‘Nestorius Reconsidered,’ <i class="calibre5">Studia Patristica</i>, Vol. 13, pp. 311–12.</p>
<p class="ntnl">P. Robinson, in an M.Phil. thesis (Oxford, 1997), argues that the basic problem with the Antiochenes did not lie within their christology, but within their anthropology. The union between the soul and body was no greater than that between the divinity and the humanity. So they were convinced that their understanding of the unity between the divinity and the humanity in Christ was completely adequate since a human being was one in exactly the same manner. But even if they did possess a better anthropology, their christology would still be inadequate since the divinity and the humanity are not united in a soul-body manner no matter how it is conceived.</p>
<p class="ntnl">I have purposely tried to avoid speaking in terms of a Stoic, Aristotelian, or Platonic understanding of the soul-body relationship. I have done so primarily because such a discussion would take us far afield of our present concerns and unduly lengthen an already extended digression. Moreover, many of the Fathers, Tertullian and the Cappadocians being exceptions, appear to be rather eclectic in their use of the soul-body model, that is, they employ it, not with philosophical rigor, but with an eye to what they wish to uphold with regard to the Incarnation.</p>
<p class="ntull">31  See J. Calvin, <i class="calibre5">Institutes of the Christian Religion</i> (London: James Clarke Ltd, 1957), I, 13; II, 12 and 13.</p>
<p class="ntull">32  All of the above quotations are taken from <i class="calibre5">Institutes</i>, II, 14. It is because of this that, despite Calvin’s critique of Nestorius, he has been accused of Nestorian leanings. For a discussion of this charge see E.D. Willis, <i class="calibre5">Calvin’s Catholic Christology</i> (Leiden: E.J. Brill, 1966), pp. 3–5. I do not think Calvin is Nestorian, but he was forced to give a ‘Nestorian’ flavor to his interpretation of the communication of idioms so as, like Nestorius, to protect the integrity of the natures. For a further discussion of Calvin’s christology see pp. 61–100. Willis concurs with J. Witte that Calvin has lost the Chalcedonian understanding of the communication of idioms founded upon the unity of the person of the Son, and that ‘he [Witte] is also probably correct in his judgment that Calvin has no clear concept of the ontological foundation of the Incarnation’ (p. 66). See J. Witte, ‘Die Christologie Calvins,’ <i class="calibre5">Das Konzil von Chalkedon: Geschichte und Gegenwart</i> III, eds A. Grillmeier and H. Bacht (Würzburg, 1951), pp. 458–59.</p>
<p class="ntnl">For a Protestant evangelical understanding of the Incarnation that is in keeping with the conciliar tradition see R.A. Muller, ‘Incarnation, Immutability, and the Case for Classical Theism,’ <i class="calibre5">Westminster Theological Journal</i> 45 (1983):22–40.</p>
<p class="ntull">33  See T.V. Morris, <i class="calibre5">The Logic of God Incarnate</i> (Ithaca: Cornell University Press, 1986), and R. Swinburne, <i class="calibre5">The Christian God</i> (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1994), pp. 192–238. For a more lengthy discussion and critique of Morris see my review of his book in <i class="calibre5">The Thomist</i> 51/2 (1987):367–72.</p>
<p class="ntull">34  Having inherited his foundational principles and convictions from within the Alexandrian tradition, especially from Athanasius, and having given considerable thought to christological concerns in his previous scriptural commentaries, Cyril’s polemical and doctrinal writing, from the onset of the Nestorian controversy, abundantly (even repetitiously) testifies to his established christological stance. However, because he was always attempting to clarify and deepen his understanding, there is a sense of an ever-advancing movement within his continually recurrent themes and concerns. This gives fluidity, but not contradiction to Cyril’s thought. Thus each word and phrase must be interpreted within the shifting context of the various points he is making at any given time. McGuckin aptly describes Cyril’s writing as a theological ‘narrative’ which is ‘flexible’ and ‘discursive.’ See <i class="calibre5">St Cyril of Alexandria: The Christological Controversy</i>, pp. 175–76.</p>
<p class="ntnl">For general studies of Cyril’s christological thought, see Grillmeier, <i class="calibre5">Christ in Christian Tradition</i>, Vol. 1, pp. 473–83; Kelly, <i class="calibre5">Early Christian Doctrines</i>, pp. 317–23; and F. Young, <i class="calibre5">From Nicaea to Chalcedon</i> (London: SCM, 1983), pp. 213–29, 240–65. For a more detailed account of Cyril’s christology, see McGuckin, <i class="calibre5">St Cyril of Alexandria</i>, pp. 175–226 and B. Meunier, <i class="calibre5">Le Christ de Cyrille D’Alexandrie: L’Humanité, Le Salut et La Question Monophysite</i> (Paris: Beauchesne, 1997).</p>
<p class="ntull">35  Because Cyril is an Alexandrian, some scholars still wish to designate his christology as an example of <i class="calibre5">logos-sarx</i> christology. This is a misleading and even false designation. While Cyril may not have fully developed, theologically, the christological significance of Jesus’ human soul, he did hold for such a human soul and did give some critical importance to it. See L. Welch, ‘Logos-Sarx? Sarx and the Soul of Christ in the Early Thought of Cyril of Alexandria,’ <i class="calibre5">St Vladimir’s Theological Quarterly</i> 38 (1994):271–92.</p>
<p class="ntull">36  It was through the Creed of Nicea that Cyril discerned, in faith, the full incarnational significance of the communication of idioms. The Son who was <i class="calibre5">homoousios</i> with the Father was the same Son who ‘suffered and rose again on the third day.’</p>
<p class="bq1f">The holy and great Council stated that ‘the only-begotten Son’, ‘begotten’ by nature ‘of the Father’, ‘true God from true God’, ‘light from light’, ‘through whom’ the Father made all things did himself ‘come down, was incarnate, made man, suffered, rose again the third day, and ascended into heaven’. These declarations and these doctrines we too must follow, taking note of the Word of God’s ‘becoming incarnate’ and ‘being made man’. We do not mean that the nature of the Word was changed and made flesh or, on the other hand, that he was transformed into a complete man consisting of soul and body, but instead we affirm this: that the Word personally (καθ’ ὐπόστασιν) united to himself flesh, endowed with life and reason. <i class="calibre5">Ad Nestorium</i>, 2, 3. E.T. from <i class="calibre5">Cyril of Alexandria: Selected Letters</i>, ed. L.R. Wickham (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1983), but slightly altered. See also <i class="calibre5">Ad Nestorium</i>, 3, 3.</p>
<p class="ntnl">J.J. O’Keefe argues that Cyril was not only more faithful to Nicea than were the Antiochenes, but that he was also more faithful to the New Testament proclamation. Unlike the Antiochenes, he fashioned his philosophical concepts to be in conformity with the biblical narrative. ‘The Antiochene position interprets the text in the light of philosophy, the Alexandrian position interprets the philosophy in the light of the text.’ ‘Kenosis or Impassibility: Cyril of Alexandria and Theodoret of Cyrus on the Problem of Divine Pathos,’ <i class="calibre5">Studia Patristica</i>, Vol. 32, p. 365. In the end Cyril was not only the better theologian, but, contrary to common scholarly opinion, he was equally the better exegete. See also O’Keefe, ‘Impassible Suffering? Divine Passion and Fifth-Century Christology,’ <i class="calibre5">Theological Studies</i> 58 (1997):41–45, 55–58.</p>
<p class="ntull">37  R.A. Norris argues that Cyril has two christological models (’Christological Models in Cyril of Alexandria,’ <i class="calibre5">Studia Patristica</i>, Vol. 13, ed. E.A. Livingstone (Berlin: Akademie Verlag, 1975), pp. 255–68). The first, which Norris believes is Cyril’s primary model, is what he calls ‘a subject-attribute model.’ Within this model Cyril can attribute divine and human predicates of one and the same subject – the Son. However, Norris also sees within Cyril’s christology ‘a compositional model.’ Here the Incarnation is seen as the act of ‘putting together’ two different realities (divinity and humanity), similar to the union of soul and body. Thus Christ is one composite entity. Norris believes that it is Cyril’s use of this second model that causes ‘such a remarkable conceptual chaos’ within his christology (p. 265). Norris is correct in that Cyril does speak of the Incarnation in two different manners, but as my following argument will show, he does not have two different christological models. What Norris fails to grasp is that Cyril uses two different sets of language or concepts not to articulate two different conceptions of the Incarnation but to state two different truths about his one conception of the Incarnation. As we will see, he uses the soul-body language to confirm the truth that Christ is one ontological being or entity (Norris’ compositional model), and he will use the subject-attribute ‘model’ in order to designate who and what the one Christ is – the one person of the Son existing as man. While Cyril is aware that he is attempting to articulate these two truths, I would agree with Norris that he seems unaware at times that he is not distinguishing them in a manner that is unambiguous.</p>
<p class="ntull">38  <i class="calibre5">Ad Nestorium</i>, 3, 8.</p>
<p class="ntull">39  <i class="calibre5">Adversus Nestorii Blasphemias</i>, 2; <i class="calibre5">proema</i>. E.T. (slightly altered): <i class="calibre5">Cyril of Alexandria: On the Incarnation Against Nestorius</i>, Library of the Fathers (Oxford: James Parker &amp; Co., 1881).</p>
<p class="ntull">40  <i class="calibre5">Ad Succensum</i>, 1, 7. E.T., Wickham.</p>
<p class="ntull">41  <i class="calibre5">Ad Succensum</i>, 2, 5. E.T., Wickham.</p>
<p class="ntnl">Similar citations, demonstrating the same point, can be found in <i class="calibre5">Ad Nestorium</i>, 3, 4; <i class="calibre5">Ad Succensum</i>, 2, 2 and 3; <i class="calibre5">Ad Eulogium; Ad Monachos</i>, 12; <i class="calibre5">Scholia de Incarnatione Unigeniti</i>, 27 (In McGuckin’s translation, 26); <i class="calibre5">Contra Diodorum et Theodorum</i>, 1, 9 and 22, 2, 4; <i class="calibre5">Quod Unus Sit Christus</i>.</p>
<p class="ntull">42  B. Meunier equally argues that Cyril used the soul-body union as a ‘simple illustration pédagogique’ and not as an exact model for the incarnational union (<i class="calibre5">Le Christ de Cyrille D’Alexandrie</i>, p. 235).</p>
<p class="bq1f">Pour Cyrille, il n’y a pas de correspondance terme à terme dans la comparaison: on ne saurait dire qu’à la chair du Verbe correspond le corps humain, et au Verbe, l’âlme; l’argumentation vise surtout à montrer qu’il y a unité de sujet, et que derrière la chair, c’est le Verbe lui-même qui est impliqué. Le parallèle n’est pas le poussé jusqu’au bout: du côté christologique, ce n’est pas le ‘tout’, c’est-à-dire le Christ comme composé Verbe-chair, qui est le sujet unique (le Verbe ne représenterait qu’une ‘partie’ dans la comparaison, ce que Cyrille n’accepterait pas de dire); à l’inverse, le modèle anthropologique n’est pas adapté à son usage christologique, sinon, il faudrait dire que l’âme dans l’homme est le sujet véritable, ce qui suppose qu’elle vient assumer le corps et done, d’une certaine façon, lui préexiste, ce que Cyrille se refuse également à dire. On voit done qu’il ne faut pas vouloir trop déduire de la comparaison, sous peine d’en trahir l’intention (pp. 241–42).</p>
<p class="ntnl">From the above we see that Meunier interprets Cyril’s use of the soul-body union to illustrate that the Word is the one subject. I agree that this is a conclusion that Cyril drew from its use, but Cyril’s actual use of the soul-body union, I would argue, is primarily to illustrate that Christ is one being, and then only did he conclude that the one being that Christ is, is the one subject of the Son of God existing as man.</p>
<p class="ntnl">Given the whole patristic christological tradition, the Holy Spirit must have worked overtime to assure that while The Athanasian Creed (‘<i class="calibre5">Quicumque</i> Creed’) employs the soul-body analogy, it does so only to illustrate that Christ is one being. ‘As a rational soul and flesh are one man, so God and man are one Christ’ (‘<i class="calibre5">Nam sicut anima rationalis et caro unus est homo, ita Deus et homo unus est Christus</i>’), Denz.-Schön., 76. Aquinas caught the limited and legitimate use of the analogy within the Creed. See <i class="calibre5">ST</i>, III, 2, 1, obj. 2 and ad 2.</p>
<p class="ntull">43  For the sake of completeness and honesty, it must be noted that on one occasion Cyril did use the manner of the relationship between the soul and body to compare the manner of the relationship between the divine and the human natures, and not just to illustrate that Christ is one entity, but to portray the workings of the communication of idioms. Cyril speaks of the relationship between the two natures as ineffable, and adds that even the relationship between the soul and body is beyond our comprehension. He then states:</p>
<p class="bqul">I should say (although the description altogether falls short of the truth) that it is fitting to understand the union of Emmanuel to be such as the soul of a man might be thought to have with its own body. For the soul appropriates the things of the body even though in its proper nature it is apart from the body’s natural passions, as well as those which impinge on it from without. For the body is moved to physical desires, and the soul which is within it feels these things too, because of the union, but in no way does it participate in these things, except in so far as it takes the fulfilment of desire as its own gratification. If the body was struck by a sword, or tortured on an iron grid, the soul would share in its grief, because it is its own body which is suffering. But in its own nature the soul does not suffer anything of these things.</p>
<p class="bqulf">This indeed is how we attribute the union to Emmanuel. For it was necessary that the soul united to it should share in the grief of its own body, so that rising above these sufferings it could submit itself as obedient to God. But it is foolish to say that God the Word shared in feeling the sufferings. For the Godhead is impassible and is not in our condition. Yet [the Word] was united to the flesh endowed with a rational soul, and when the flesh suffered, even though he was impassible, he was aware of what was happening within it, and thus as God, even though he did away with the weaknesses of the flesh, still he appropriated those weaknesses of his own body. This is how he is said to have hungered, and to have been tired, and to have suffered for our sake. <i class="calibre5">Scholia de Incarnatione Unigeniti</i>, 8. E.T., McGuckin, <i class="calibre5">St Cyril of Alexandria</i>, pp. 300–1.</p>
<p class="ntnl">I have quoted Cyril at length so as to leave no doubt that, while he employs the soul-body relationship, he does so not as a model for the Incarnation, but solely as an illustrative comparison for understanding the communication of idioms. As the soul can appropriate the sufferings of the body and make them its own, so the Word, in becoming man, can make the weaknesses of his humanity his own. While I am not particularly pleased with the illustration for reasons that are now apparent, the reason Cyril could make such a comparison is precisely because Christ, like a human being, is one and the one that he is, is the person of the Son of God existing as man. ‘Accordingly, the union of the Word with humanity can reasonably be compared with our condition. Just as the body is of a different nature to the soul, still from both we say that one man results, so too from the perfect hypostasis of God the Word and from a humanity perfect in his own right there is one Christ, and the selfsame is at once God and man.’ <i class="calibre5">Scholia</i>, 8.</p>
<p class="ntnl">While McGuckin provides a good explanation of Cyril’s use of the soul-body relationship, and rightly sees it as central to his thought, he does not appreciate Cyril’s singular and proper use of it. He assumes that the above use is Cyril’s primary and sole understanding. See <i class="calibre5">St Cyril of Alexandria</i>, pp. 198–207, and his Introduction to Cyril’s <i class="calibre5">On the Unity of Christ</i> (Crestwood: St Vladimir’s Press, 1995), pp. 38, 40. For a similar understanding of the above passage see H. Chadwick, ‘Eucharist and Christology in the Nestorian Controversy,’ <i class="calibre5">Journal of Theological Studies</i>, NS 2 (1951):159–62. B. Meunier interprets the above passages in a manner similar to my own. See <i class="calibre5">Le Christ de Cyrille D’Alexandrie</i>, pp. 243–53. F. Young not only has an equal understanding of the above passages, but she also grasps that Cyril’s primary use of the soul-body analogy is to illustrate that Christ is one being, and therefore should ‘not be taken as an analysis of the relationship’ between the divinity and the humanity. ‘A Reconsideration of Alexandrian Christology,’ <i class="calibre5">Journal of Ecclesiastical History</i> 22/2 (1971):106. See also pp. 105 and 112, and her <i class="calibre5">From Nicaea to Chalcedon</i>, pp. 260–63. G. Gould has also given a clear account of Cyril on this point. See ‘Cyril of Alexandria and the Formula of Reunion,’ <i class="calibre5">Downside Review</i> 106 (1988):238–43. While R.A. Norris believes that Cyril’s primary christological model is that of the subject-attribute model, he nonetheless interprets, wrongly I believe, Cyril’s use of the soul-body union as a way for him to espouse, in a confused and contradictory manner, a compositional model of the Incarnation whereby the divinity and humanity form one nature (see ‘Christological Models in Cyril of Alexandria,’ <i class="calibre5">Studia Patristica</i>, Vol. 13, pp. 261–67. See also R.A. Norris, ‘Toward a Contemporary Interpretation of the Chalcedonian <i class="calibre5">Definition</i>’ in <i class="calibre5">Lux in Lumine</i>, p. 68.</p>
<p class="ntull">44  For examples of Cyril speaking of the union of the divinity and the humanity as ‘natural’ (ἔνωσις ϕυσική) or ‘according to nature’ (κατά ϕύσιν), see <i class="calibre5">Adversus Nestorii Blasphemias</i>, 2, 1 and 13; <i class="calibre5">Ad Nestorium</i>, 3, 4, 5, and Anathema 3.</p>
<p class="ntnl">Here I disagree with Wickham’s translation and interpretation. He makes an equivalence between Cyril’s saying that the union is ‘natural’ and that the union is καθ’ ύπόσιασιν giving the meaning ‘substantial union’ to both. While both do designate a substantial union, Cyril uses ‘natural’ to emphasize that the union establishes Christ as one entity, and he uses, as will be seen shortly, καθ’ ύπόστασιν (’according to person’ or ‘personally’) to designate the distinctive and singular type of substantial union it is. See Wickham, <i class="calibre5">Cyril of Alexandria: Selected Letters</i>, p. 4, fn. 6.</p>
<p class="ntull">45  <i class="calibre5">Ad Nestorium</i>, 3, 8. E.T., Wickam.</p>
<p class="ntull">46  Bearing on this point, Cyril actually has two readings of the <i class="calibre5">mia physis</i> formula. The more prevalent one is: μία ϕύσις τού λόγου σεσαρκωμένη. The other, less common rendering, ends in σεσαρκωμένου. I have waffled over the years on whether or not the two are significantly different in meaning. I presently hold that both, in the light of the soul-body comparison, which accompanies both, denote that <i class="calibre5">mia physis</i> be understood as denoting one entity. However, this is most clearly seen within the σεσαρκωμένου rendering where it modifies the του̑ λόγου. The translation would be: ‘The one nature (entity) of the incarnate Word.’ The one entity of Jesus is the Word existing as man. Where the σεσαρκωμένη modifies the μία ϕύσις the formula is translated: ‘The one incarnate nature of the Word.’ This too specifies that Christ is one entity – one incarnate entity – but now the one incarnate <i class="calibre5">physis</i> is that of the Word, and so hidden within the use of the term <i class="calibre5">physis</i> is the notion of one subject or person as well. Thus this rendering of the formula could be translated: ‘The one incarnate nature/person of the Word.’ This translation, it seems to me, best articulates Cyril’s meaning and is one that is closest to Chalcedon’s understanding. The whole problem could have been solved if Cyril had consistently used πρόσωπον or ύπόστασις instead of ϕύσις.</p>
<p class="ntnl">McGuckin interprets Cyril’s use of the formula in a similar manner. ‘For Cyril, if the christological union means anything it means that there is only one reality to be affirmed henceforth. This concrete reality (physis) is what stands before the Christian observer; it is a single concrete enfleshed reality before us: Mia Physis Sesarkomene. What is more, the concrete, fleshed-out reality, is that of the Word of God, none other. In short, by using the phrase Cyril is attributing the person of the Word as the single subject of the Incarnation event.’ <i class="calibre5">St Cyril of Alexandria</i>, p. 208. However, ‘Cyril himself, in the negotiations with the Antiochenes after the council of Ephesus, began to realise for clarity’s sake the use of physis as a subject-referent could no longer be sustained.’ P. 140. See also pp. 148 and 210. For an historical assessment of the <i class="calibre5">mia physis</i> formula in the context of the Council of Ephesus, the Formula of Union, and the Council of Chalcedon, see J. Romanides, ‘St Cyril’s “One <i class="calibre5">Physis</i> or <i class="calibre5">Hypostasis</i> of God the Logos Incarnate” and Chalcedon’ in <i class="calibre5">Christ in East and West</i>, eds P. Fries and T. Nersoyan (Macon: Mercer Press, 1987), pp. 15–34.</p>
<p class="ntull">47  <i class="calibre5">Ad Nestorium</i>, 2, 3: see also 2, 4 and 3, 11. As noted above, I disagree with Wickham’s translation. He translates καθ’ ὑπόστασηιν as ‘substantially.’ While it does designate a substantial union, Cyril saw it as a substantial union of a special and singular type. The incarnational act does not bring about a union of natures, but rather it is the act by which the humanity is united substantially to the person (ύπόστασις) of the Word. Likewise, Wickham interprets μία ϕύσις as equivalent to ύπόστασει μια. While the ύποστάσει μιᾳ̂ is contained within the μία ϕύσις, the nuance is quite significant. The <i class="calibre5">mia physis</i> is emphasizing the one entity of Christ. The <i class="calibre5">hypostasis mia</i> is highlighting who the subject is within the one entity of Christ – the one Word/Son.</p>
<p class="ntull">48  On the personal/existential understanding of the Incarnation, see Weinandy, <i class="calibre5">Does God Change?</i>, pp. 53–55. R.A. Norris appears to interpret Cyril’s christology in a similar manner. See ‘Toward a Contemporary Interpretation of the Chalcedonian <i class="calibre5">Definition</i>’ in <i class="calibre5">Lux in Lumine</i>, pp. 69–73.</p>
<p class="ntull">49  For a more complete exposition of my interpretation of Chalcedon, see Weinandy, <i class="calibre5">Does God Change?</i>, pp. 63–66.</p>
<p class="ntnl">For two recent misreadings of Chalcedon, see A. Baxter, ‘Chalcedon, and the Subject of Christ,’ <i class="calibre5">Downside Review</i> 107 (1989):1–21 and T.W. Bartel, ‘Why the Philosophical Problems of Chalcedonian Christology Have Not Gone Away,’ <i class="calibre5">Heythrop Journal</i> 36 (1995):153–72. The problems they perceive within Chalcedon are due to their own misconceptions. They read Chalcedon as espousing a union of natures after the model of the soul-body union.</p>
<p class="ntnl">Some recent forms of ‘Spirit Christology’ have also misinterpreted not only Chalcedon but Nicea as well. For example see R. Haight, ‘The Case for Spirit Christology,’ <i class="calibre5">Theological Studies</i> 53 (1992):257–87; G.W.H. Lampe, ‘The Holy Spirit and the Person of Christ’ in <i class="calibre5">Christ, Faith and History</i>, eds S.W. Sykes and J.P. Clayton (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1972), pp. 111–30, and <i class="calibre5">God as Spirit</i> (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1977). For critiques of these positions, see T. Weinandy, ‘The Case for Spirit Christology: Some Reflections,’ <i class="calibre5">The Thomist</i> 59/2 (1995):173–88, and J. Wright, ‘Roger Haight’s Spirit Christology,’ <i class="calibre5">Theological Studies</i> 53 (1992):729–35.</p>
<p class="ntnl">For an excellent discussion of the ecumenical significance of and obstacles within the Chalcedonian definition in the light of recent various inter-church dialogues, particularly among and with the ‘Nestorian’ and ‘Monophysite’ churches, see D. Wendebourg, ‘Chalcedon in Ecumenical Discourse,’ <i class="calibre5">Pro Ecclesia</i> 7/3 (1998):307–32.</p>
<p class="ntull">50  Many contemporary theologians, in their attempt to assure the full humanity of Jesus, deny his full divinity. However, in so doing they depreciate the significance of the very thing they want to enhance – the humanity. One never enhances the import of Jesus’ full humanity, in all its authentic historicity, by denying that it is truly the divine Son who is man. The awesome significance of the humanity lies precisely in the fact that who this man is, is none other than the eternal Son of God.</p>
<p class="ntnl">For one recent example of this totally misconceived approach to the humanity of Christ, and so a thorough misrepresentation of Cyril and the christological tradition, see J. Macquarrie, <i class="calibre5">Christology Revisited</i> (London: SCM, 1998), pp. 43–60. Also see his <i class="calibre5">Jesus Christ in Modern Thought</i> (London: SCM, 1990). For a critique of Macquarrie see C.C. Hefling, ‘Reviving Adamic Adoptionism: The Example of John Macquarrie,’ <i class="calibre5">Theological Studies</i> 52 (1991):476–94.</p>
<p class="ntull">51  In its desire to clarify false understandings, past and present, of the Incarnation, the Papal International Theological Commission has stated that the Council of Chalcedon demands that one uphold within the Incarnation both God’s transcendence and his immanence.</p>
<p class="bq1f">Both these aspects must be asserted unrestrictedly, while excluding anything that would smack of juxtaposition or admixture. In Christ, then, transcendence and immanence are perfectly conjoined …. [T]he definition of Chalcedon radically transcends Greek thought, for it lets coexist two viewpoints which Greek philosophy had always regarded as irreconcilable: divine transcendence, the very soul of the Platonic system, and divine immanence, which is the spirit of the Stoic theory. <i class="calibre5">Select Questions on Christology</i> (1981), II, B, 6. See the whole of section II, B.</p>
<p class="ntull">52  In fairness it should be noted that Athanasius grasped that the divine and human attributes were predicated of one and the same Son. However, what Athanasius failed to achieve, although his understanding of the communication of idioms placed him on the brink, was the precise and comprehensive conceptual understanding of the Incarnation which could properly justify such predication. See Weinandy, <i class="calibre5">Does God Change?</i>, pp. 20–25.</p>
<p class="ntull">53  R.A. Norris rightly argues that Cyril’s and Chalcedon’s primary christological model is that of the subject-attribute model (though I disagree with the term ‘model’). ‘The Fathers of Chalcedon agreed with Cyril of Alexandria and with the long tradition preceding him that the subject of statements about Christ was simply the divine Word.’ ‘Toward a Contemporary Interpretation of the Chalcedonian <i class="calibre5">Definition</i>’ in <i class="calibre5">Lux in Lumine</i>, p. 79. See also pp. 74–75, 77–79. Yet Norris interprets such an understanding not as a metaphysical statement about the ontological constitution of Christ, but merely as a linguistic or grammatical tool to govern Christological language. Commenting on the Chalcedonian definition, he states:</p>
<p class="bq1f">What our historical analysis suggests is that the <i class="calibre5">Definition</i>’s terminology can best be treated as <i class="calibre5">second-order language</i>. Functionally considered, the nature-substance terminology reflects not a metaphysic but something more elementary: a view of the logical structure of the normal sentence. Hence it becomes intelligible in its Christological use when it is understood not as a direct account of the constitution of the Person of Christ, but as a definition of the normative form of any statement about Christ, without consideration of the metaphysical framework which such a direct statement must inevitably presuppose. Pp. 76–77. See also pp. 71–75.</p>
<p class="ntnl">What Norris fails to appreciate is that Cyril’s and Chalcedon’s insistence that the divine and human attributes be predicated of the one and same subject of the Son is founded upon their metaphysical understanding of how Christ is ontologically constituted. The communication of idioms was the catalyst that gave rise to such an understanding (that Christ is the one person/subject of the Son <i class="calibre5">existing</i> as God and man), but such an understanding in turn provided the metaphysical warrant for the use of such language (that divine and human attributes must therefore be predicated of the one Son). Christological grammar and logic are dependent upon christological ontology. Getting the christological ontology right was at the heart of the Nestorian and Monophysite controversies and Chalcedon’s response to them.</p>
<p class="ntnl">R. Siddals agrees with Norris’ interpretation of Cyril, but argues that underlying Cyril’s use of the communication of idioms is a subject-accident christological model, that is, the Son being God actually possesses the divine attributes as part of his being, but acquires, within the Incarnation, the human attributes as ‘virtual accidents’. Cyril ‘treats humanity etc. as mysteriously inhering within the Word as an <i class="calibre5">accident</i> inheres within a subject.’ ‘Logic and Christology in Cyril of Alexandria’, <i class="calibre5">Journal of Theological Studies</i> NS 38/2 (1987):351 and 356. However, for Cyril, the Son does not acquire the humanity as an ‘accident’, as if it were something that he substantially and existentially was not, but only a new characteristic attached to his divine nature. For Cyril the Son <i class="calibre5">is</i> God, and in the Incarnation, he actually <i class="calibre5">comes to be</i> man, and so equally <i class="calibre5">is</i> man. Being a man is what the Son of God <i class="calibre5">is</i>, and so the humanity is not a mere ‘accident’ added to his more substantial divine being. Thus the use of the communication of idioms is not a mere espousal of accidental predicates to the Son, but statements about his actual mode of being or manner of existing. See Siddals’ entire argument, pp. 242–67, and her ‘Oneness and Difference in the Christology of Cyril of Alexandria,’ <i class="calibre5">Studia Patristica</i>, Vol. 18/1, ed. E.A. Livingstone (Kalamazoo: Cistercian Publications, 1985), pp. 207–11. For a similar criticism of Siddals, see B. Meunier, <i class="calibre5">Le Christ de Cyrille D’Alexandrie</i>, pp. 276–79.</p>
<p class="ntull">54  <i class="calibre5">Ad Nestorium</i>, 2, 3 and 4. For Cyril ‘all the sayings contained in the Gospels must be referred to single person (ένὶ πρoσώπῳ), to the one incarnate subject of the Word (ὐποστάσει μιᾳ̂ τη̑ του̑ λόγου σεσαρκωμένη). <i class="calibre5">Ad Nestorium</i>, 3, 8. See <i class="calibre5">Ad Nestorium</i>, 3, 9–11.</p>
<p class="ntull">55  <i class="calibre5">Ad Nestorium</i>, 3, Anathema 12.</p>
<p class="ntull">56  Pope John Paul II stresses that the Son who is consubstantial with the Father is the same Son who truly suffers as man. See <i class="calibre5">Salvifici Doloris</i>, n. 17.</p>
<p class="ntull">57  <i class="calibre5">Scholia de Incarnatione Unigeniti</i>, 37. Cyril earlier states: ‘He suffers humanly in the flesh as man, he remains impassible divinely as God.’ <i class="calibre5">Ibid</i>., 36. See also 33–35. In <i class="calibre5">Quod Unus Sit Christus</i>, he writes: ‘So, even if he [the Son] is said to suffer in the flesh, even so he retains his impassibility insofar as he is understood as God.’ (E.T., J. McGuckin, <i class="calibre5">On the Unity of Christ</i>, p. 117.</p>
<p class="ntnl">References to Cyril speaking of the Son being impassible as God and passible as man could be multiplied, but especially see <i class="calibre5">Ad Succensum</i>, 2, 2 and his three defences of the twelve anathamas: <i class="calibre5">Explicatio pro Duodecim Capitibus Adversus Orientales Episcopos; Epistola ad Euoptium;</i> and <i class="calibre5">Explicatio Duodecim Capitum Ephesi Pronuniata</i>.</p>
<p class="ntnl">The Papal International Theological Commission in its document <i class="calibre5">Theology, Christology, Anthropology</i> (1983) states:</p>
<p class="bq1f">According to the Council of Ephesus (cf. The letter of St. Cyril to Nestorius: <i class="calibre5">COD</i>, 3, 42), the Son made his own the sufferings to be inflicted on his human nature (<i class="calibre5">oikeiosis</i>). Attempts to reduce this proposition (and others like it in the tradition) to a simple <i class="calibre5">manner of speaking</i> do not sufficiently recognize its profound meaning. But the Christology of the Church does not allow us to affirm formally that Jesus Christ could suffer according to his divine nature (cf. <i class="calibre5">DS</i> 16, 166, 196 s., 284, 293 s., 300, 318, 358, 504, 635, 801, 852). II, B, 3.</p>
<p class="ntull">58  I concur with J. Hallman that, as far as I can also ascertain, this exact phrase (άπαθός ἒπαθεν) is not found in Cyril’s Greek. See ‘The Seed of Fire: Suffering in the Christology of Cyril of Alexandria and Nestorius of Constantinople,’ <i class="calibre5">Journal of Early Christian Studies</i> 5:3 (1997):383, fn. 57. Nonetheless, it is Cyrilian in tone and meaning. Cyril did state ‘that within the suffering body was the Impassible’ (ἠ̑ων γὰρ ό άπαθὴς έν τῳ̑ πάσχοντι σώματι) (<i class="calibre5">Ad Nestorium</i>, 2, 5), and that ‘he [<i class="calibre5">the Son</i>] was in the crucified body claiming the sufferings of his flesh as his own impassibly’ (ή̑ν έν τῳ̑ σταυρωθέντι σώματι, τα της ιδίας σαρκός άπαθω̑ς οίκειούμενος πάθη). <i class="calibre5">Ad Nestorium</i>, 3, 6. He also stated that the Son ‘suffered, as it were, impassibly’ (πάθοι ἂν άπαθω̑ς), <i class="calibre5">De Recto Fide</i>, 27.</p>
<p class="ntull">59  Many scholars miss the logic of Cyril’s christology. They argue that Cyril, unlike Nestorius and the Antiochenes, showed little interest in the humanity of Jesus. Actually, the precise opposite is the case. Cyril was concerned with the divinity of the Son but primarily for incarnational reasons. He wished to assure that it was actually the divine Son who lived a full human life. This is why he adamantly defended the communication of idioms. Because Cyril gloried in the biblical drama of the Incarnation, that is, that it truly was the impassible Son of God who did actually suffer as man, he was not afraid to use language that appeared to be incoherent, yet was logically coherent in the light of christological ontology. See J.J. O’Keefe, ‘Impassible Suffering? Divine Passion and Fifth-Century Christology,’ <i class="calibre5">Theological Studies</i> 58 (1997):46–51, and B. Meunier, <i class="calibre5">Le Christ de Cyrille D’Alexandrie</i>, pp. 243–75.</p>
<p class="ntnl">A case in point is J. Hallman. Because Cyril insisted that the Son of God remains impassible as God and yet truly suffers as man, Hallman, similar to his criticisms of the Fathers that we noted in <a href="12_Chapter05.xhtml" class="calibre3">Chapter 5</a>, accuses him of being illogical See ‘The Seed of Fire: Divine Suffering in the Christology of Cyril of Alexandria and Nestorius of Constantinople,’ <i class="calibre5">Journal of Early Christian Studies</i> 5/3 (1997):384 and 391. I previously noted that Hallman consistently mistakes the logic of the Fathers, and here again he completely misses Cyril’s logic. So captivated is he by the idea of God suffering as God, that he is incapable of grasping that what is truly at issue is God suffering as man in a human manner. Moreover, behind Hallman’s accusation that Cyril is illogical lies the erroneous premise that the incarnational process is a compositional union of natures modeled after the soul-body union. This is how Hallman ultimately wants to conceive the incarnational union for it then would allow God to suffer as God. If Cyril did conceive the Incarnation in such a manner, then he would be illogical However, since Cyril’s understanding of the Incarnation is radically different – being a personal/existential understanding – he is not illogical at all. The person of the Son, within his existence as God, is impassible. Within his existence as man, the Son is passible. While not fully comprehensible, this is the rational, intelligible, and coherent logic that the mystery of the Incarnation demands.</p>
<p class="ntnl">In the course of the Monophysite controversy, Leontius of Jerusalem defended Cyril’s and Chalcedon’s understanding of the Incarnation and the communication of idioms. See K.P. Wesche, ‘The Christology of Leontius of Jerusalem: Monophysite or Chalcedonian?’, <i class="calibre5">St Vladimir’s Theological Quarterly</i>, 31/1 (1987):65–95. Equally, as a result of the Theopaschite controversy, the Second Council of Constantinople (AD553) upheld Cyril’s and Chalcedon’s understanding of the communications of idioms by condemning those who denied that ‘one of the Trinity suffered in the flesh.’</p>
<p class="ntull">60  M. Dodds concurs when he states: ‘Even if we were to suppose the impossible situation that in Christ God suffers as God in his divine nature, his suffering would then have little to do with us, for we do not suffer <i class="calibre5">as God</i>, but <i class="calibre5">as humans</i>.’ He quotes then Aquinas:</p>
<p class="bq1f">Compassion (<i class="calibre5">miseratio</i>) is said as a heart is sorrowful (<i class="calibre5">miserum</i>) at the miseries (<i class="calibre5">miseria</i>) of another. This may happen in two ways. One way is through understanding alone. And thus God, without any passion, understands our misery. For he knows our frame as it is said in <i class="calibre5">Ps</i>. 102:14. Another way is through experience. And thus Christ has experienced our misery, especially in [his] Passion. <i class="calibre5">Super ad Heb</i>. II, lect. 4 [§153].</p>
<p class="nlp">And he then concludes: ‘In order to affirm that Christ experienced <i class="calibre5">our</i> miseries and suffered as we do, we must maintain not that Christ suffered in his divinity, but that he, like us, suffered in his humanity.’ <i class="calibre5">The Unchanging God of Love</i>, pp. 306–7. See also pp. 305–9. Similarly, see M. Gervais, ‘Incarnation et Immuabilité Divine,’ <i class="calibre5">Revue des Sciences Religieuses</i> 50 (1976):234–37; W. Hill, ‘Does Divine Love Entail Suffering in God?’ in <i class="calibre5">God and Temporality</i>, pp. 64–66; and Sebastian Moore, ‘God Suffered,’ <i class="calibre5">Downside Review</i> 27 (1959):122–40. On maintaining the distinction between what is divine and what is created within the Incarnation, see D. Burrell, ‘Incarnation and Creation: The Hidden Dimension,’ <i class="calibre5">Modern Theology</i> 12/2 (1996): 211–20.</p>
<p class="ntnl">It is well known that Pope Leo in his famous <i class="calibre5">Tome</i> to Flavian, which was sanctioned by the Council of Chalcedon and held in high esteem by the Antiochenes, stated that some things Jesus did he did as God and some things Jesus did he did as man. This appears at first sight to negate what I have just espoused. Leo wished, in so saying, to uphold the two natures of Christ in opposition to Eutyches. While this is not the most apt form of expression (Leo may be great, but this, hopefully, was not the apex of his greatness), it must be remembered that he said this within in the context of noting how Jesus revealed himself. Some actions revealed that he is man – eating, grieving, suffering, etc. Some actions revealed that he was God – working miracles. This is true. What Leo failed to note is that the actions which revealed that Jesus was God were done as a man. If they were not done as a man, he would not have revealed that it is indeed the Son of God who is a man. While the bishops at Chalcedon may have proclaimed that ‘Peter speaks through Leo!’, it is only because Peter first spoke more clearly through Cyril and Leo was found, after much debate, to be in agreement with him, that Leo’s <i class="calibre5">Tome</i> was found acceptable. On such a central dogmatic issue of the faith, that Leo’s <i class="calibre5">Tome</i> was found acceptable is hardly surprising for, if what Cyril said was true, Leo, being the Pope, would never have held an opposing view, even if his concerns were somewhat different and his form of expression was not the most apt.</p>
<p class="ntnl">McGuckin provides an excellent analysis of Cyril’s thought and Leo’s <i class="calibre5">Tome</i> in relationship to the Creed of Chalcedon. See <i class="calibre5">St Cyril of Alexandria</i>, pp. 233–40. For a similar comparison between Cyril’s christology and that of the Formula of Reunion, see G. Gould, ‘Cyril of Alexandria and the Formula of Reunion,’ <i class="calibre5">Downside Review</i> 106 (1988):235–52.</p>
<p class="ntull">61  In the following I will be both summarizing and developing what I wrote in <i class="calibre5">Does God Change?</i>, pp. 82–100, 184–86.</p>
<p class="ntull">62  Human beings relate to one another through mediating acts – words, hugs, kisses. While these actions bring about actual relations, the very fact that they are mediating acts means that human beings are never fully in communion with one another as they are in themselves. For example, if two people intensely love one another, their words and acts of love never fully express the whole of their love for the acts, being mediatory, do not fully embody or express the entirety of the love.</p>
<p class="ntull">63  <i class="calibre5">ST</i>, III, 8, 5, ad 3. Aquinas also states: ‘The grace of union [that is, the created relational effect within the humanity] is the personal being itself (<i class="calibre5">ipsum esse personale</i>) that is given gratis from above to the human nature in the person of the Son.’ <i class="calibre5">ST</i>, III, 6, 6.</p>
<p class="ntnl">While I would disagree with some of his conclusions, R. Cross does demonstrate that Aquinas did not conceive the Incarnation as a union of natures, but as the humanity being united to ‘the person’ of the Son. See ‘Aquinas on Nature, Hypostasis, and the Metaphysics of the Incarnation,’ <i class="calibre5">The Thomist</i> 60/2 (1996):171–202.</p>
<p class="ntull">64  Aquinas states:</p>
<p class="bq1f">Every change or passion, furthermore, proper to one’s body can be ascribed to him whose body it is….So, if the body of Peter is wounded, scourged, or dies, it can be said that Peter is wounded, scourged, or dies. But the body of that man is the body of the Word of God. Therefore, every suffering that took place in the body of that man can be ascribed to the Word of God. So it is right to say that the Word of God – and God – suffered, was crucified, died, and was buried. <i class="calibre5">SCG</i>, IV, 34, 11.</p>
<p class="nlp">See also <i class="calibre5">SCG</i>, IV, 34, 29; 39, 2, and <i class="calibre5">ST</i>, III, 14–15; 16, 4–5.</p>
<p class="ntnl">While it is completely contrary to the perceived theological wisdom of the age, what we must conclude from the above is that the Son of God is only truly passible as man because he is immutable as God. The immutability of God, far from being a stumbling block to the Incarnation, is actually its prolegomenon. It is only because the Son is able to remain immutably himself, as a subsistent relation fully in act, that he is able to come to exist as man, and thus be truly passible as man. For a fuller discussion of this point, see Weinandy, <i class="calibre5">Does God Change?</i>, pp. 96–100, 184–90.</p>
<p class="ntull">65  I will be summarizing and developing here what I wrote in <i class="calibre5">In the Likeness of Sinful Flesh</i>, pp. 12–13; <i class="calibre5">The Father’s Spirit of Sonship</i>, pp. 120–2, and more extensively in ‘The Human “I” of Jesus,’ <i class="calibre5">The Irish Theological Quarterly</i> 62/4 (1996/97):259–68.</p>
<p class="ntnl">This last article gives a rather full bibliography with some critique of recent, primarily Catholic, authors on this topic.</p>
<p class="ntull">66  The similarity and difference between Jesus and other human beings can be illustrated in that when, for example, a human being says ‘I am John Smith’ that human ‘I’ is identifying a human person who is John Smith – that is <i class="calibre5">who</i> this human person is. Jesus too speaks with a human ‘I’, but the identity of this human ‘I’ is not that of a human person (a human ‘who’), but that of the Son of God (a divine ‘who’).</p>
<p class="ntnl">A couple of scriptural illustrations may be helpful as well. Jesus said: ‘I have come not to abolish the Law and the prophets, but to fulfil them’ (Mt 5:17). Who is it who is saying this? The Son. The Son is the subject of the ‘I’. But, while the subject or identity of the ‘I’ is divine, the ‘I’ itself is human for the Son is saying ‘I’ as a man. If the Son were saying ‘I’ in a divine manner, then it would be the Son, as God, speaking <i class="calibre5">in a man</i> and not <i class="calibre5">as a man</i>. In this particular verse it would then mean that the Son came to fulfil the Law and the prophets <i class="calibre5">as God</i> in a man rather than fulfilling them <i class="calibre5">as a man</i>.</p>
<p class="ntnl">Even those passages within the Gospel of John, which stress the divine identity of Jesus, illustrate this. For example, Jesus said: ‘Truly, truly, I say to you, before Abraham was, I am’ (Jn 8:58). While the ‘I am’ reveals Jesus’ divine identity, that ‘I am’ was conceived within a human mind and formed with human words and so was spoken from within a human self-consciousness, within the parameters of a human ‘I.’ Jesus is revealing the identity of his human ‘I.’ The ‘I’ of the ‘I am’ is a human ‘I’ but in saying ‘I am’ Jesus is identifying his human ‘I’ as that of the eternal ‘I am’ of Son of God. As Jesus, the Son of God becomes conscious of himself as the divine Son within his human ‘I.’ It is as a man that the Son becomes self-consciously aware of his divine identity, and so can say – with(in) a human ‘I’ as a man – ‘I am the Son of God.’</p>
<p class="ntull">67  The distinctiveness of my position might be seen in comparison with J. Galot’s. I reproduce here a partial footnote from ‘The Human “I” of Jesus’ (fn. 15, pp. 267–8).</p>
<p class="ntnl">While J. Galot proposed a position that is very similar to the present thesis, yet he would deny that Jesus possesses a human ‘I’. He writes in <i class="calibre5">Who is Christ?</i>:</p>
<p class="bq1f">Does Jesus possess a human ‘I’? There can be no doubt that Jesus possesses an ‘I’ perceived in a human way by his human consciousness. But must this ‘I’ necessarily be a human ‘I’? Are we obliged to admit that there are two ‘I’s’ in Christ, one divine and the other human, or must we say, on the contrary, that there is in him only the one identical ‘I’ of the Son of God? P. 320.</p>
<p class="nlp">From his examination of scripture, he concludes:</p>
<p class="bq1f">Obviously, we are not speaking of a divine ‘I’ that manifests itself as such in its pure state, but of a divine ‘I’ in a human context, of an ‘I’ that asserts itself within a human consciousness and in human language. It is the divine ‘I’ of a man who is living a genuinely human life. P. 321–22.</p>
<p class="nlp">Or again:</p>
<p class="bq1f">The autonomy of Jesus’ human psychology likewise accounts for the fact that his divine ‘I’ manifests itself only in an integrally human consciousness. We have already noted that this ‘I’ did not reveal itself in its pure state. It always appeared within a human consciousness, and its expression was entirely human. The reason certain scholars have tended to speak of a human ‘I’ in Christ may stem from their desire to emphasise this fact. However, while the T of Christ asserted itself with a profoundly human psychology, it remained the divine ‘I’ of the Son. P. 334.</p>
<p class="ntnl">The obvious reason Galot wishes to maintain that the ‘I’ of Jesus is divine is to guarantee the same identity of the ‘I’ and of the person of the Son. Jesus cannot possess two ‘I’s.’ This identity I too wish to maintain. I agree that Jesus cannot possess two ‘I’s’. However, it is precisely because it is the divine T not in its ‘pure state’, but under ‘human conditions’ that I argue that it is therefore more correct to state that it is the human T of a divine person, of the Son. I wish to make a distinction between the subject (the who) of the T and the manner of the Ts’ (the who’s) expression. The identity of the T (the who) is the same, that of the Son, but the manner of the subject’s identity is as man, and therefore the T is the human T of a divine subject or person.</p>
<p class="ntnl">See also Galot’s <i class="calibre5">La Conscience de Jesus</i> (Paris: Duculot-Lethielleux, 1971).</p>
<p class="ntnl">R. Williams may be suggesting something similar to what I propose here. See ‘“Person” and “Personality” in Christology,’ <i class="calibre5">Downside Review</i> 94 (1976):253–60.</p>
<p class="ntull">68  My whole book <i class="calibre5">In the Likeness of Sin ful Flesh</i> is devoted to defending and explicating the christological and soteriological significance of this thesis. I argue for this position firstly from an historical (patristic, medieval, and contemporary authors) and theological basis, and secondly, and primarily, from scripture. My guiding principle throughout was the patristic dictum that ‘what is not assumed is not saved,’ and thus only if the Son assumes our fallen nature, does he save it.</p>
<p class="ntnl">T.F. Torrance argues in a similar fashion:</p>
<p class="bq1f">The Incarnation is to be understood as the coming of God to take upon himself our fallen human nature, our actual human existence laden with sin and guilt, our humanity diseased in mind and soul in its estrangement or alienation from the Creator. This is the doctrine found everywhere in the early Church in the first five centuries, expressed again and again in the terms that the whole man had to be assumed by Christ if the whole man was to be saved, that the unassumed is unhealed, or that what God has not taken up in Christ is not saved. <i class="calibre5">The Mediation of Christ</i> (Edinburgh: T &amp; T Clark, 1992), p. 39. See also pp. 40–42.</p>
<p class="nlp">In The Fourth Constantinople Lecture, <i class="calibre5">The Humanity of Christ</i> (London: Anglican and Eastern Churches Association, 1985), Bishop K. Ware, arguing from the same premise that what is not assumed is not saved, also maintains:</p>
<p class="bq1f">Surely the Saviour’s solidarity with the human race will be fatally incomplete if he is not identified with us in our present fallen situation. What is required is not merely an exterior, juridical imputation of our guilt to Christ, but something far deeper and more costly: an inner, organic sharing on his part in all our brokenness. P. 4.</p>
<p class="ntnl">For other contemporary authors who argue for a similar position, see K. Barth, <i class="calibre5">Church Dogmatics</i>, I/2, pp. 151–58; J.D.G. Dunn, ‘Paul’s Understanding of the Death of Jesus as Sacrifice’ in <i class="calibre5">Sacrifice and Redemption: Durham Essays in Theology</i>, ed. S.W. Sykes (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1991), pp. 35–40; H.U. von Balthasar, <i class="calibre5">Mysterium Paschale</i> (Edinburgh: T &amp; T Clark, 1990), pp. 11–48, and <i class="calibre5">Theo-Drama IV: The Action</i>, pp. 247–54, 267–73.</p>
<p class="ntull">69  I argue in my book <i class="calibre5">In the Likeness of Sinful Flesh</i> that Paul used the term ‘likeness’ (όμοιώματι) not to emphasize the dissimilarity of the Son from us, as if he merely took on the appearance or guise of sinful flesh, but rather to emphasize his similarity to us. The Son assumed the reality of sinful flesh and so actually and visibly bore our likeness. I similarly argue that ‘made to be sin’ means that the Son assumed both our sinful condition in the Incarnation and, in his death, the full weight of our sin and condemnation. See pp. 78–82.</p>
<p class="ntull">70  <i class="calibre5">De Carne Christi</i>, 16, 25. See the whole of 16 where Tertullian argues that the Son assumed a real and not a phantasmal humanity; that he assumed a humanity which truly bore the likeness to sinful flesh; and yet within this ‘sinful humanity’ he did not sin.</p>
</body>
</html>
