<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en-US">
  <head>
    <title>Does God Suffer?</title>
    <link href="../styles/page-template.xpgt" rel="stylesheet" type="application/vnd.adobe-page-template+xml"/>
    <meta content="urn:uuid:e0000000-0000-0000-0000-000004626051" name="Adept.expected.resource"/>
    <meta http-equiv="Content-Type" content="text/html; charset=utf-8"/>
  <link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="../../stylesheet.css"/>
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="../../page_styles.css"/>
</head>
  <body class="calibre">
<p class="cta"><a id="page_214" class="calibre2"></a><a href="06_Contents.xhtml#ch9" id="ch9" class="calibre2">9</a></p>
<p class="cs"><a href="06_Contents.xhtml#ch9" class="calibre2">The Redemptive Suffering of Christ</a></p>
<p class="pn">In the previous chapter I argued that a proper conception of the Incarnation mandates that the divine Son of God truly suffers as man. I equally stressed that confining the suffering to his human state, far from limiting the significance of the Son’s suffering, actually enhances it. He truly experienced the full brunt of human suffering in an authentic human manner and not in some mitigated divine manner. However, it is far from sufficient merely to demonstrate that the Son of God lived as man and so suffered.</p>
<p class="in">Many contemporary theologians, who posit suffering within God’s divine nature, give the impression that once they have demonstrated this, they have done all that is required and significant. The soteriological import of divine suffering remains barren. It does not achieve any end other than to register that God does indeed suffer in solidarity with humankind, and so comfort can be taken from this. Why we should be comforted by a suffering God remains unclear, especially if he, like us, can now do little to alleviate it and is rendered helpless in vanquishing its actual causes.</p>
<p class="in">Because I believe that Jesus and his redemptive work is the Father’s full and decisive response to human suffering and its causes, this chapter has three inter-related ends: 1) While this is not the setting to articulate a full systematic soteriology, yet I want in this chapter to present what I consider to be some important and essential elements of Jesus’ redemptive work. In so doing I wish to be faithful to the biblical proclamation, and not arbitrarily construct a soteriology of my own philosophical making. Therefore, what is said here will be set out, primarily, but not exclusively, in scriptural terms and concepts.<sup class="calibre6">1</sup> It is only in the light of this <a id="page_215" class="calibre3"></a>biblical soteriology that the Christian view of suffering can be properly discerned and appreciated. 2) I see Jesus’ passion, death, and resurrection as one salvific event that gave rise to Pentecost. Thus, I especially wish to discern the causal soteriological connections between these various salvific aspects, and why they together allow for the outpouring of the Holy Spirit.<sup class="calibre6">2</sup> I also want to articulate the effects that this outpouring has upon those who become Christians, for it is these effects that fashion the Christian perspective on human suffering. 3) In the light of the above, I am simply attempting to demonstrate that the outpouring of the Spirit established a new salvific order, one that was not previously present or available. While God’s action within the Old Testament era provided the <a id="page_216" class="calibre3"></a>historical and theological foundation for Jesus’ redemptive work, and even anticipated what he himself would accomplish, yet Jesus and his redemptive work radically altered, in the outpouring of the Spirit, humankind’s salvific standing. Thus, human suffering can only be properly interpreted and understood from within this new salvific context. Thus, the ultimate goal of this chapter is to provide the soteriological prolegomenon for examining the Christian view of human suffering. This I will do in the following chapter.</p>
<p class="sec"><b class="calibre8">The Work of the Cross</b></p>
<p class="pn">We saw in the previous chapter that for the Son of God to become man means that it was actually the person of the Son (in his <i class="calibre5">esse personale</i>) who was truly the experiencing and acting subject within his human existence as man. The subjective identity of the man Jesus, <i class="calibre5">who</i> this man was, was God the Son. Moreover, the Son, as the sole subject, actually experienced the whole of human life and acted in a fully human manner from within the confines of his own human ‘I.’ This assures the authenticity of his human experience and action. Last, I argued that the Son did not assume some generic, antiseptic, or immunized humanity, which would quarantine him from our sinful human history and condition, but rather he assumed a humanity which bore the birthmark of sinful Adam, and so entered into our human history as one like ourselves.</p>
<p class="in">All of the above must now be taken to the event of the cross so as to discern the soteriological significance of Jesus’ death. I now want to argue that on the cross the Son of God as man simultaneously performed three actions: 1) He assumed our condemnation. 2) He offered himself as an atoning sacrifice to the Father on our behalf. 3) He put to death our sinful humanity.<sup class="calibre6">3</sup></p>
<p class="psec"><b class="calibre9"><i class="calibre5">Assuming Our Condemnation</i></b></p>
<p class="pn">Sin, it must be remembered, is contrary and hostile to all that is good, holy, and loving, and so is an affront to the perfectly good, holy, and loving God. As such the unredeemed (or unrepentant) sinner reaps sin’s intrinsic and inevitable consequence – separation from God. God and sin cannot abide with one another. Biblically, physical death gives expression to the deeper death of having been separated from the God of life.</p>
<p class="in">However, while sin had made humankind God’s enemies, the Father’s response to sin was not that of allowing humankind to suffer its just fate. Rather, the Father’s salvific goal reconfirms his plan first inaugurated at the dawn of creation. He desires that we share fully in the eternal life of the Trinity (see Eph. 1:3–14). Being conformed into the likeness of his Son through the Holy Spirit, the Father becomes our Father. The Trinity then is the source and goal both of creation and redemption. Thus, in love, the <a id="page_217" class="calibre3"></a>Father sent his Son into the world so that we might not perish in our condemnation, but have eternal life with him (see Jn 3:16; 1 Jn 4:9).<sup class="calibre6">4</sup> This is the point of our soteriological departure.</p>
<p class="in">First then, in this ‘sending’ the Son assumed not only our sin-marred humanity, but also, in his death, the full weight of its condemnation. The Father sent ‘his own Son in the likeness of sinful flesh, and to deal with sin, he condemned sin in the flesh’ (Rom. 8:3). The cross actualized the Father’s condemnation of our sinful flesh, for sin itself, ‘when it is fully grown, gives birth to death’ (James 1:15). ‘The wages of sin is death’ (Rom. 6:23; see Gen. 2:17). Even though Jesus never personally sinned (see Heb. 4:15, 1 Pet. 2:22, Jn 8:46, 1 Jn 3:5), yet the Father, for our sake, ‘made him to be sin who knew no sin’ (2 Cor. 5:21). This he did both in sending the Son in the likeness of sinful flesh and in having him mount the cross upon which sin was condemned. Thus the Incarnation leads directly to the cross, for the cross expresses the Son’s complete solidarity with our sinful condition and its condemnation.<sup class="calibre6">5</sup> The Son of God was truly born under the law, and thus under its curse (see Gal. 4:4).</p>
<p class="in">This condemnation, due to sin, is nothing less than being separated from God. In the garden of Gethsemane, it was this cup of condemnation that the Son, in agony, saw set before him in its full horror, and ardently implored the Father to remove (see Mt 26:36–46; Mk 14:32–42; Lk 22:39–46; Jn 12:27; Heb. 5:7–9). Thus, the Son’s human cry from the cross – ‘My God, my God, why have you abandoned me?’ (Mt 27:46) – was no mere charade, but the authentic lamentation of one who was suffering the wages of humankind’s sin. The Son of God truly tasted death for us, not just the suffering of physical death, but the deeper ‘second death’ of being separated from God (see Heb. 2:8–9).<sup class="calibre6">6</sup> Having been ‘made sin’, the Son of God, as man, literally suffered the pains of hell, for hell is simply the experience of the absolute loss of God’s loving presence.</p>
<p class="in">Moreover, the loss of God’s loving presence is experienced not as a mere absence. This would indeed be horrendous in itself. But, more positively and abhorrently, the divine Son actually experienced, as man, the very wrath of God. While this must be properly nuanced, yet it must not <a id="page_218" class="calibre3"></a>be mitigated, for here we discover the depths to which the Son was willing to descend so as to seize the extreme limit of human suffering.</p>
<p class="in">As stated above, sin is an act contrary to all that is good and holy, and thus an affront to the all-loving God. Thus sin is a free act of separation – the separating of oneself from God. It is this sinful act of separating oneself from God which literally creates hell, for that is what hell is – being separated from God. If this separation is not healed, the sinner experiences this separation not merely as the absence of God, but more emphatically as his actual abandonment. ‘To be abandoned by God’ adds to the conception of ‘separation’ the positive notion of God’s wrath, for such an abandonment testifies to God’s righteous judgment upon the sinner. There is no other manner in which the sinner can now experience the absence of God, not because God has changed from being a loving God to being a wrathful God, but because the sinner now literally embodies all that is ungodly. To experience the wrathful abandonment of God is but the self-verification of what one has indeed become – ungodly. Obviously then, to experience the wrath of God is not an experience of God avenging himself in rage or capriciously punishing in anger. God does not hate the damned. God remains the God of love, but within and because of his love, he hates and despises what the sinner has become. God is experienced as being wrathful, for God judges or sanctions that such a separation is the proper and only just consequence (and so punishment) of sin, not because he has so said, but because sin itself has so said. The wrath of God is simply God’s approval of what sin itself rightfully demands.<sup class="calibre6">7</sup></p>
<p class="in">It is the wrath of God in this sense, as the ultimate necessary consequence of the playing out of sin in the presence of the good and holy God, which the Son of God experienced. Having assumed our condemnation, he experienced the wrathful abandonment of God.<sup class="calibre6">8</sup> He plunged <a id="page_219" class="calibre3"></a>to these depths of suffering in a manner that was genuinely human, and not in some abridged, and so humanly inauthentic, divine manner. He stood in our stead, and he did so out of love for us, that we might never encounter such a tragic end. In conformity with the ancient patristic principle, he assumed our condemnation that we might be saved from it.<sup class="calibre6">9</sup></p>
<p class="in">It is difficult to overstate this point, and it is equally difficult to appreciate its full significance. Because of our present sinful condition and, more so, because of our own personal sin, we, as human beings, are incapable of experiencing full communion with the loving Father. However, the Son of God, while he assumed a humanity marred by sin, nonetheless lived in perfect obedience to the Father, and so humanly experienced, as far as is humanly possible in this life, the consummate <a id="page_220" class="calibre3"></a>love of his Father. Only when one has experienced the fulness of the Father’s love, can one fully know the utterly depressing agony and despair of being abandoned. But how, in taking on and experiencing our condemnation, did the Son of God save us from it? Again, it is not enough for him just to have experienced the ultimate in human suffering.</p>
<p class="psec"><b class="calibre9"><i class="calibre5">Offering an Atoning Sacrifice</i></b></p>
<p class="pn">Jesus in his death did not just experience our condemnation. Rather, his death also achieved humankind’s reconciliation to the Father. One of the common refrains throughout the New Testament is that Christ ‘died for us’ (see Rom. 5:6 and 8, 14:9 and 15; 1 Cor. 8:11, 15:3; 2 Cor. 5:14–15; Gal. 2:20–21; 1 Thess. 5:10; 1 Pet. 3:18) or that ‘he gave himself up for us’ or that ‘he was given up for us’ (see Mt 20:28; Mk 10:45; Jn 3:16; Rom. 4:25, 8:32; Gal. 1:4, 2:20; Eph. 5:2 and 25; Titus 2:14). Humankind, not God, is the beneficiary of Jesus’ death. Through Jesus’ death God is not reconciled to us, but we are reconciled to God. But how does Jesus’ death alter our relationship to God and in so doing change us? Here we must examine the sacrificial nature of Jesus’ death.</p>
<p class="in">The biblical understanding of sacrifice can only be understood within the equally biblical context of God’s relationship to his people and the sin that violates that relationship. While sin initially broke humankind’s relationship with its Creator, God established a covenant with Israel. This covenant was ratified by a sacrifice. Moses, in the sprinkling of the blood (the symbol of life) upon the altar and the people, manifested that through this covenant God and Israel would share a common life (see Exod. 24). Yahweh would be the God of Israel and Israel would be his holy people (see Deut. 7:6, 14:2 and 21, 28:9). The commandments embodied the holy life that Israel was to live. It is sin that repudiates this holy life and so transgresses the covenant. Sin itself, if not fully the sinner, embodies all that is ungodly. In itself it knows no goodness, justice, truth, love or holiness. The sinful act not only repudiates them, but also positively wars against them in order to achieve, at whatever the cost to them, its own selfish ends. This is the arrogance of sin. It warrants neither God nor others but itself alone.</p>
<p class="in">In contrast, sacrifice, as a means of atoning for sin, is always seen within the Old Testament liturgical rites as the act whereby human beings lovingly offer something to God, for example a lamb, that is pure and unblemished, and so precious. The act of sacrifice outwardly represents and expresses, and so embodies, the interior desire to atone or make reparation for the sinful actions committed so as to be cleansed of ungodliness with its condemnation, and so assume once more a godly state within the covenantal relationship. The sacrifice, by its very nature, entails suffering, for one suffers the loss of something precious, but here the suffering is experienced as something good and right, for one has lovingly offered it to God, instead of claiming it for oneself. It is the repentant or atoning love with which the sacrifice is offered that makes it meritorious, and it is the suffering (not of the animal but of the one making the offering) contained within the sacrifice which manifests the depth of the love. Only within this Old Testament understanding of sacrifice can we discern the sacrificial nature of Jesus’ death.</p>
<p class="in"><a id="page_221" class="calibre3"></a>Jesus stated that ‘the Son of Man came not to be served but to serve, and to give his life as ransom (λύτρον) for many’ (Mt 20:28; Mk 10:45). Jesus ransomed us in the sense that he freed us from our condemnation – the slavery of sin, the dominion of Satan, and the fulness of death. He did so by offering, in our stead and on our behalf, his life to the Father. But why did Jesus have to become a sacrificial offering on our behalf in order to ransom us?</p>
<p class="in">It was not the Father who, in righteous anger, vindictively imposed such a sacrifice, but rather, as prefigured in the Old Testament, sin itself demanded such a sacrifice. Only a pure, holy and loving sacrifice of atonement could ultimately free us from sin’s condemnation, and so reconcile us to the Father. It was actually the Father who provided, in the person of his incarnate Son, the means of our reconciliation. ‘All of this is from God, who reconciled us to himself through Christ’ (2 Cor. 5:18–19; see Rom. 5:10–11; Col. 1:19–20). It is God himself who ‘has rescued us from the power of darkness and transferred us into the kingdom of his beloved Son, in whom we have redemption (ἀπολύτρωσιν) the forgiveness of sin’ (Col. 1:14). God himself obtained the Church ‘with the blood of his own Son’ (Acts 20:28; see Titus 2:14).<sup class="calibre6">10</sup></p>
<p class="in">Jesus assumed the debt of sin in assuming our condemnation, and he paid the debt of sin in offering his life in love to the Father on our behalf (see 1 Cor. 6:20, 7:23). He freed us from the debt that sin imposed. While Jesus offered himself in sacrifice to the Father, such a sacrifice was offered not for the Father’s benefit, but for ours. We, not the Father, are the beneficiaries of such a sacrifice. ‘You [Jesus] were slaughtered and by your blood you ransomed/purchased (ἠγόρασας) for God saints from every tribe and language and people and nation’ (Rev. 5:9). On the cross Jesus not only became ‘a curse for us’ in assuming our condemnation, but he simultaneously redeemed us ‘from the curse of the law’ through his sacrificial death (Gal. 3:13). Jesus set aside our condemnation by ‘nailing it to the cross’ (Col. 2:14).</p>
<p class="in">Thus, Jesus is the lamb of God (see Jn 1:36; Rev. 5:6, 12), who takes upon himself all sin with its punishment (see Isa. 53; Acts 8:31–5), and offers his life blood in expiation (see Lev. 17:11, 14). Jesus ‘loves us and freed us from our sins by his blood’ (Rev. 1:5). Equally, he is the Passover lamb of our redemption (see Exod. 12:46; Jn 19:36; 1 Cor. 5:7). ‘You know that you were ransomed (ἐλυτρώθητε) from the futile ways inherited from your ancestors, not with perishable things like silver or gold, but with the precious blood of Christ, like that of a lamb without defect or blemish’ (1 Pet. 1:18–19). Because Jesus, as the lamb of God, offered his <a id="page_222" class="calibre3"></a>life (blood) to the Father to free us completely and forever from the bondage of sin, so his blood is equally the blood of the new and everlasting covenant with the Father (see Mt 26:26–28; Mk 14:22–24; Lk 22:19–20; 1 Cor. 11:23–25).</p>
<p class="in">Furthermore, within the Pauline corpus, ‘Christ died for the ungodly,’ for it was ‘while we still were sinners [that] Christ died for us’ (Rom. 5:6, 8). Thus, ‘we have been justified by his blood,’ and ‘saved through him from the wrath of God,’ for ‘while we were enemies, we were reconciled to God through the death of his Son’ (Rom. 5:9–10). The logic is straightforward: Sin made us ungodly enemies of the Father and so subject to his wrath. Jesus justified us through his sacrificial death on the cross, thus reconciling us to the Father. Again, it is humankind, and not the Father, who reaps the benefits of Jesus’ sacrifice. His atoning sacrifice allows us to be once more at one with God. In fact ‘God was pleased to reconcile to himself all things, whether on earth or in heaven, by making peace through the blood of his cross’ (Col. 1:20). Thus, ‘in him we have redemption (ἀπολύτρωσιν) through his blood, the forgiveness of our trespasses’ (Eph. 1:7). Humankind is reconciled to the Father and made holy ‘through the redemption (ἀπολυτρώσεως) that is in Christ Jesus, whom God put forward as an expiation (ίλαστήριον) by his blood’ (Rom. 3:24–5). While living within our sinful condition, Jesus reversed or counteracted the sinful disobedience of humankind, by living under obedience to the Father even unto death. His one righteous act of obedience brought ‘acquittal and life for all’ and so ‘many will be made righteous’ (Rom. 5:18–19).<sup class="calibre6">11</sup></p>
<p class="in">The Letter to the Hebrews confirms that, while the Son of God was of our same sinful stock (see Heb. 2:11, 14–15), and so was tempted in every way, yet he nonetheless lived, unlike us, in complete obedience to the Father and so never sinned (see Heb. 2:17–18, 4:15). The Father prepared a body for his Son, and it was within that body that the Son declared: ‘Lo, I have come to do your will, O God,’ and ‘it is through that will that we have been sanctified though the offering of the body of Jesus Christ once for all’ (Heb. 10:5–10). It was through the Son’s human will, through his human ‘yes’ to the Father, that we have been sanctified. Jesus himself is the High Priest and victim for he offers himself for our cleansing from sin. ‘He entered the Holy Place, not with the blood of goats and calves, but with his own blood, thus obtaining eternal redemption (λύτρωσιν)’ (Heb. 9:12; see 9:22). It is only because the Son offered his human life through the Holy Spirit that such an offering is holy and so efficacious. If the blood of animals was able, in the past, to purify the flesh, ‘how much more will the blood of Christ, who through the eternal Spirit offered himself without blemish to God, purify our conscience from dead works to worship the living God?’ (Heb. 9:14).<sup class="calibre6">12</sup></p>
<p class="in">From this brief exposition of the sacrificial nature of Jesus’ death, a number of points must be highlighted. I especially want to note the <a id="page_223" class="calibre3"></a>various causal connections, that is, the efficacious nature of Jesus’ passion and death.</p>
<p class="in">First, Jesus’ sacrifice of himself was a twofold act of love. It was an act of sacrificial love offered to the Father, for in love the Son offered his own life to the Father to atone for and so offset or, literally, counteract all humankind’s ungodly sinful acts. This act of love was done out of complete obedience to the Father for it was ultimately the Father who was reconciling the world to himself through his Son. Moreover, it was an act of sacrificial love performed out of love for humankind, for the incarnate Son did, out of love for humankind, what it could not do on its own behalf. It was this twofold perfect act of love which made Jesus’ sacrifice meritorious. Moreover, it was the suffering of death contained within this sacrifice, the very handing over of his holy and precious life on our behalf to the Father, which embodied and manifested the consummate depth of his love, so making it supremely efficacious.<sup class="calibre6">13</sup></p>
<p class="in">From the above we must, second, grasp the causal connection between the atoning nature of Jesus’ sacrificial death and its reconciling effect. In offering himself out of love for us, the incarnate Son offered a sinless, perfect, and holy sacrifice to the Father, one that would fully and adequately express humankind’s reparational or atoning love in the face of sin. Thus, this sacrifice atoned for all the sin of humankind, but in so doing it effected a reconciliation with God. This is why Jesus’ blood is the blood of an everlasting and unbreakable covenant. Jesus’ pure and holy sacrifice so abundantly atoned for sin that there is no longer any sin that has not been dealt with. Every human being can reap the benefit of Jesus’ atoning sacrifice and so be reconciled to God within the new covenant established in his blood.</p>
<p class="in">Third, it must be equally clearly perceived that, while it was truly the person of the Son who offered the sacrifice, he did so, in accordance with the truth of the Incarnation, as man. The merit of the sacrifice, which expiated our guilt and condemnation thus reconciling us to the Father, was precisely located in the Son’s human love for the Father and for us. The Son of God then did not offer his divine life to the Father <i class="calibre5">in a man</i>. If this were the case, it would demand that his human life, with his human love, and the suffering that that love entailed, were of no salvific value. They would become mere symbols attesting to what the Son was doing as God. It must be the Son of God <i class="calibre5">as man</i> who lovingly assumed our condemnation and, as one of us on our behalf, who offered his human <a id="page_224" class="calibre3"></a>life in love to the Father.<sup class="calibre6">14</sup> The merit of this love is actualized and expressed in the extent of the human suffering he willingly endured. In his suffering, the very Son of God actually experienced, as an authentic man, the depth of humankind’s sinful plight, and he equally experienced as man the price that needed to be paid in order to rescue us from it – the atoning sacrifice of his own human life. The humanity of the Son, the humanity that was offered to the Father, was the efficacious means through which redemption and reconciliation was obtained.<sup class="calibre6">15</sup></p>
<p class="in">Fourth, Jesus triumphed over or vanquished the suffering of our condemnation by or through the sacrificial suffering of offering his life to the Father on the cross. This causal connection, to my knowledge, has never been adequately discerned. Jesus suffered our condemnation on the cross and, in the very same act of assuming our condemnation, he simultaneously and equally offered, in love, his life to the Father as an atoning sacrifice on our behalf for that condemnation. Jesus’ sacrificial offering of his life to the Father on our behalf transformed the suffering of our condemnation into an act of freeing us from such condemnation. This was due to the perfect love simultaneously contained and expressed within both aspects of this one act of suffering death on the cross. In death Jesus assumed and so suffered, out of love for us, our condemnation, and, in the same suffering of death, Jesus lovingly offered his life to the Father out of love for us. The love contained and expressed within the sacrificial suffering vanquished the suffering of our condemnation, so freeing us from it.<sup class="calibre6">16</sup></p>
<p class="in">Fifth, as I have emphasized above, Jesus’ sacrifice must not be seen as placating an angry God, as if he were an offended person, who <a id="page_225" class="calibre3"></a>demanded in justice, to be propitiated and appeased. It is sin itself, in conformity with the justice of God, that has justly imposed upon humankind a debt, and it is this debt that is expiated through the death of Jesus. Jesus rightly offered his life as a sacrifice of atonement to the Father for our benefit and not his. Through his sacrificial death he made reparation for us. Such a sacrifice vanquished our sin and our condemnation, and in so doing enabled us to be reconciled to the Father.</p>
<p class="psec"><b class="calibre9"><i class="calibre5">Putting to Death Our Sinful Humanity</i></b></p>
<p class="pn">Simultaneously with the experience of complete abandonment and the offering of his human life in sacrifice to the Father for the forgiveness of sin, the Son also put to death our old sinful humanity, the same sin-marred humanity that he himself had assumed. ‘We know that our old self (παλαιὸς ἠμω̑ν ἄνθρωπος) was crucified with him so that the body of sin (τὸ σω̑μα τη̑ς ἁμαρτίας) might be destroyed, and we might no longer be enslaved to sin’ (Rom. 6:6). On the cross our sinful flesh died, for that is the flesh that the Son assumed.</p>
<p class="in">Paul also states that ‘in him also you were circumcised with a spiritual circumcision, by putting off the body of the flesh (του̑ σώματος τη̑ς σαρκός) in the circumcision of Christ (Col. 2:11, see 2 Tim. 2:11). ‘Flesh’ (σάρξ) for Paul, similar to ‘the body of sin,’ connotes the whole person mastered by the disposition of sin with its passions and desires. Jesus’ death on the cross was the true and authentic circumcision for it was there that he was freed of our sin-marred humanity.</p>
<p class="in">Now the reason that our sinful flesh died on the cross is twofold. It died for in Jesus it had experienced its just condemnation – not only physical death but also the absence of God’s presence. Simultaneously, it was offered lovingly to the Father in reparation for sin. ‘One has died for all; therefore all have died’ (2 Cor. 5:14). Because the Son of God lived a pure and holy life of obedience to the Father as a member of the sinful race of Adam, with his own sin-marred humanity, the loving offering of that humanity on the cross brought about its demise. Our sinful human nature was put to death for the Son of God transformed it into a pure, holy, and loving sacrifice to the Father.</p>
<p class="in">From our examination of these three soteriological truths we have seen that Jesus not only suffered, but that in so doing he also confronted the very source of all suffering – sin. This is what makes Jesus and the suffering he endured unique. All human beings suffer because of sin. The incarnate Son also suffered because of sin, though not his own. But in suffering Jesus freed himself and the whole of humankind from suffering’s cause – sin. He did this by enduring the full consequence of sin – our sinful condemnation.<sup class="calibre6">17</sup> More positively, he suffered in love, for he offered his own life as a sacrifice to the Father on our behalf. Together these resulted both in the death of our sinful nature and in our being reconciled to the Father. On the cross then, Jesus thoroughly dealt with <a id="page_226" class="calibre3"></a>sin.<sup class="calibre6">18</sup> However, this was not the only result of the Son’s death on the cross. Because his sacrifice was the loving offering of his holy life by which we were reconciled to the Father and so set free from sin with its condemnation, Jesus won for us the new resurrected life of the Holy Spirit.<sup class="calibre6">19</sup></p>
<p class="sec"><b class="calibre8">The Resurrection: The Father’s Love for the Son</b></p>
<p class="pn">Jesus’ suffering on the cross then forms a part of the whole redemptive mystery, for it only finds its salvific significance in the light of the resurrection and the consequent sending forth of the Holy Spirit. If the Father had not raised Jesus from the dead, it would not merely mean that we would never have known that on the cross our condemnation had been annulled, nor that we had been reconciled to the Father, nor that our sinful humanity had been put to death. More profoundly, the absence of Jesus’ resurrection would simply, but frankly, attest that none of these had actually been accomplished. Jesus would rightly stand discredited and condemned as a blasphemous fraud. It is here that we must discuss the Father’s attitude toward Jesus’ suffering and death.</p>
<p class="in">Much recent theology, as we saw, has stressed not only that the Son suffered on the cross, but that the Father also actually suffered in union with the Son. Moltmann, for example, argues that as the Son experienced being abandoned by his Father, so the Father himself equally suffered the loss of his Son.<sup class="calibre6">20</sup> For Moltmann and others, if the Father did not suffer in solidarity with his Son, it would mean that the Father was detached from and indifferent to Jesus’ plight. What is to be made then of such claims that the Father suffered?</p>
<p class="in">I have argued extensively that, because the persons of the Trinity perfectly possess all goods as fully actualized, they are incapable of suffering within their divine nature for they never suffer, unlike human beings, the loss of some good. Since the persons of the Trinity can never be deprived of their divine perfection, they never experience any inner <i class="calibre5">angst</i> over their own state of being which would cause them to suffer. Moreover, they cannot undergo successive changes of emotional states. What must be remembered is that this lack of suffering within the Trinity actually purifies their love of all selfish concerns, and so allows it to be <a id="page_227" class="calibre3"></a>thoroughly altruistic. The Trinity loves freely and never in a manner that would benefit themselves – such as to relieve their own suffering. Likewise, I have emphasized that this absence of suffering within the Trinity does not make the persons of the Trinity less compassionate and merciful. Rather, these attributes are intensified, for the absence of suffering allows their love to be perfect, that is, fully actualized. Thus all facets of love are fully in act – goodness, commitment, affection, joy, kindness, as well as mercy, compassion, grief, and sorrow. The Trinity then does not need to actualize sequentially various aspects or expressions of love depending upon changing circumstances and situations. They are all subsumed within their perfect actualized love. In addressing then the issue of whether or not the Father suffers, the guiding principle must be his absolute, perfect, and unchanging love for the Son.</p>
<p class="in">First, from within the Trinity itself the Father did not suffer the loss of his Son nor was he deprived of his presence. The Father, the Son, and the Holy Spirit are eternally united within their trinitarian life as the one God. The death of the Son as man cannot then be conceived as the ‘breakup’ of the Trinity. This would reduce the passion and death of Jesus to a myth whereby what would be taking place in history is but the mythical expression of what is actually taking place on a divine transcendent level. Likewise, the resurrection would then be seen not as the glorious reconstitution of the incarnate Son, but as the constitution or reconstitution of the Trinity. This would equally demand that the Father raised his Son from the dead not solely for the well-being of his Son and for the well-being of humankind, but more so for the well-being of himself. The entire altruistic nature of the Father’s love would thus be lost. The Father, having suffered the loss of his Son, would then alleviate his own suffering by raising his Son from the dead. This again would also undermine the historical and salvific significance of the resurrection, for it now would become a mere mythical symbol of what would be more importantly taking place ahistorically and transcendently within God. The vanquishing of human suffering with its causes would be cast off the stage of human history, and would be replaced by the more important issue of vanquishing, ahistorically, the suffering of God.<sup class="calibre6">21</sup></p>
<p class="in">Second, it must also be maintained, from within the historical and incarnational setting of Jesus’ passion and death, that the Father did not suffer, for he himself suffered no loss of any good. Nonetheless, from within the event of the cross, with all the suffering that this event entails, the Father’s love was present. The Incarnation of the Son with his subsequent passion and death demanded that the Father not merely loved the Son as he exists eternally as Son, but that the Father also loved the Son as he existed as man. The Incarnation thrust the Father’s love upon the stage of human history, and it was upon the historical event of the cross that the Father’s love was focused. The Father’s love was not focused on his own divine well-being, nor even on the divine well-being of his Son. Rather, he was fully attentive to the well-being of his Son as he existed as <a id="page_228" class="calibre3"></a>man and, from within that well-being, he was equally, and maybe even more so, vigilant of the well-being of all humankind.<sup class="calibre6">22</sup></p>
<p class="in">Third, from within his fully actualized love it is possible to attribute grief and sorrow to the Father. While grief and sorrow are predicated of the Father metaphorically, in that such emotions do not imply that the Father underwent emotional changes of state or that he suffered some form of divine mental and emotional distress comparable to human beings, yet what is expressed within these metaphors is nonetheless absolutely true. The Father did grieve over what his incarnate Son had lost – his human well-being and life. He grieved, in love, over all that his Son suffered, physically and mentally, as man. In compassion his love went out to his Son as he humanly experienced being abandoned in hell. One might say that the Father was even angered, in the sense that he recognized that so grave an injustice had been committed against his holy and innocent Son (see Mt 21:33–46 and parallels). His deep sorrow and grief did not spring from or manifest suffering and loss within himself, but rather they sprang from, manifested, and expressed his completely beneficent, all-consuming, and perfect love for his Son.</p>
<p class="in">Fourth, what is often lost sight of when discussing the grief, sorrow and compassion of the Father over the passion and death of his Son is that the Father, equally and simultaneously, was pleased with his Son and rejoiced over what his Son was doing or had done. Actually, despite what may be its theological validity, there is little or no New Testament warrant for asserting that the Father grieved over the death of his Son.<sup class="calibre6">23</sup> In contrast there is scriptural evidence that the Father was well pleased with his Son for, out of love for him and for his people, he willingly suffered and died (see Mt 20:28; Jn 15:13; Eph. 5:2; 1 Jn 3:16). The theology of Jesus’ baptism manifests that the Father was pleased with his Son <a id="page_229" class="calibre3"></a>precisely because, as the anointed Messiah, he would be obedient even unto death.<sup class="calibre6">24</sup> Moreover, Jesus proclaimed that ‘The Father loves me, because I lay down my life in order to take it up again’ (Jn 10:17; see also Jn 3:35, 5:20, 8:29). The whole Johannine theology of the Father glorifying the Son portrays the cross not as an event in which the Father suffers, but as the moment in which the Father actually glories in what his Son is doing, and so it is the historical moment when the Father glorifies him. Through the cross, the Father manifested, and continues to manifest, to the sinful world the glory of his Son. While, within his fully actualized love for his incarnate Son, the Father may have grieved over his Son’s suffering and death, yet his pleasure and even joy over what the Son had accomplished completely relativizes and even overshadows his grief or sorrow.</p>
<p class="in">Fifth, as I noted in an earlier discussion, God’s compassion and mercy is seen most fully in its effects and not simply in some divine ‘emotional’ self-expression.<sup class="calibre6">25</sup> It is in the dispelling of evil, and so of the suffering caused by it, that God properly manifests his grief, sorrow, compassion, and mercy. Thus God’s compassion and mercy, which contain no suffering, are of far greater significance than human compassion and mercy, which do contain suffering. Unlike human beings, who are often incapable of relieving the evil which is causing the suffering, God is capable of vanquishing the evil and the suffering that accrues to it. More positively, God can restore to someone the good that was lost through the evil suffered. This is precisely what the Father did, in the most unprecedented manner, when he raised Jesus gloriously from the dead. The resurrection manifests the Father’s all-consuming love for his incarnate Son and testifies to his profound mercy and compassion for what his Son had endured. If one wishes to know the inner mind of the Father in the face of his Son’s passion, death, and descent into hell, one only needs to look at the resurrection. The resurrection is the Father’s conclusive answer to the suffering of his Son, and with it his consummate answer to all human suffering.</p>
<p class="sec"><b class="calibre8">The Resurrection: The Father’s Vindication of His Son</b></p>
<p class="pn">The Father validated and manifested the efficacy of his Son’s suffering in raising him gloriously from the dead. Actually, the Father’s raising Jesus from the dead was the direct fruit of the cross, and the Father ensured that Jesus himself was the first to have experienced it.<sup class="calibre6">26</sup> It is to this intrinsic connection between Jesus’ suffering on the cross and his resurrection with the resultant gift of the Spirit that we will now turn.</p>
<p class="in"><a id="page_230" class="calibre3"></a>According to Acts, Peter proclaimed at Pentecost that the very one whom the Jewish and Roman authorities thought worthy of crucifixion is the very same one whom God considered worthy of raising up, ‘having freed him from death because it was impossible for him to be held in its power’ (Acts 2:24).<sup class="calibre6">27</sup>‘God has made both Lord and Messiah, this Jesus whom you crucified’ (Acts 2:36). But why could death not hold Jesus in its power; the presupposition being that death, in the full theological sense of physical death accompanied with its condemnation, did hold him for a time in its power? Moreover, why did the Father make him both Lord and Christ?</p>
<p class="in">The Father would not abandon his Holy One in Hades nor allow him to experience corruption (see Acts 2:25–32; Ps. 16:8–11). Jesus was freed from Hades (from condemnation) and raised up incorruptibly because, as the Holy One, he offered his holy life to the Father in loving obedience. Being innocent and holy the Father could not leave him abandoned. In the resurrection the Father established and authenticated Jesus’ holiness and the work he had accomplished on the cross. Moreover, the resurrection expressed the Father’s abundant delight in his Son and in what his Son had achieved.</p>
<p class="in">Likewise, ‘being exalted at the right hand of God, and having received from the Father the promise of the Holy Spirit, he has poured out this that you both see and hear’ (Acts 2:33, see 1:4–5). Having defeated all of humankind’s enemies – sin, death, and condemnation, and having reconciled sinful humankind to the Father through his death on the cross, Jesus, now as the risen Lord, was empowered to pour out upon humankind the benefit of that reconciliation – the Holy Spirit. The sending forth of the Holy Spirit, with all that this sending forth entails, equally establishes then the efficacy of the cross and confirms the present exalted reality of Jesus as Lord. Moreover, it is precisely the present availability of the promised Holy Spirit, as the concomitant consummation of Jesus’ death and resurrection, which contains the potential, as we will see, for radically altering the context, experience, and meaning of human suffering.</p>
<p class="in">The Pauline corpus accents that it is the Father who raised Jesus from the dead so making him Lord (see Rom. 6:4, 8:11, 10:9; 1 Cor. 6:14, 15:15; 2 Cor. 4:14; Gal. 1:1; Eph. 1:20; Col. 2:12; 1 Thess. 1:10; see also 1 Pet. 1:21). The risen salvific lordship of Jesus is predicated upon his crucifixion. Having put to death the sinful flesh he had inherited from Adam through suffering our condemnation, and having offered his life as an atoning sacrifice to the Father on our behalf, Jesus, in being raised bodily from the dead, is the first to experience the efficacy of the cross. In the resurrection Christ himself bears the first-fruit of his own redemptive death (see 1 Cor. 15:20). He is ‘the <i class="calibre5">firstborn</i> from the dead’ (Col. 1:18). Through his righteous obedience Jesus, on the cross, reversed the disobedience of Adam and his progeny. Having overcome the congenital sin and death <a id="page_231" class="calibre3"></a>of Adam’s race, he has become, through his resurrection, the new man – the new Adam (see Rom. 5:12–21; 1 Cor. 15:22–23, 45; Eph. 2:15). Being the new Adam, Jesus, as the risen Lord, has become the father of a recreated human race.</p>
<p class="in">This divine wisdom of a crucified Lord is foolishness to the Jews and Greeks alike, nonetheless he who was crucified is humankind’s ‘righteousness and sanctification and redemption’ and so is ‘the Lord of glory’ (1 Cor. 1:30 and 2:8; see also 1:18—2:7). While it was the Father who handed him over to death for our sins, he nonetheless made him Lord by raising him from the dead (see Rom. 4:24–25). On the cross Jesus ‘died to sin once for all,’ and <i class="calibre5">therefore</i> ‘death no longer had dominion over him.’ As risen, ‘the life he lives, he lives to God’ (Rom. 6:9–10). Moreover, it is only because Jesus is the risen Lord that we have the assurance that through his blood we are now reconciled to God (see Rom. 5:9). ‘For if while we were enemies, we were reconciled to God through the death of his Son, much more surely, having been reconciled, will we be saved by his life’ (Rom. 5:10).</p>
<p class="in">It was precisely because the Son humbled himself not only in becoming man, but also in accepting death even on the cross, that God ‘highly exalted him and gave him the name that is above every name’ (Phil. 2:6–11). It is the depth of Jesus’ humility, his dying for sin, that is the cause of his supreme exaltation as the risen Lord. For Paul the gospel itself concerns the Son who, having descended from David’s flesh, has now been ‘declared to be Son of God with power according to the Spirit of holiness by resurrection from the dead, Jesus Christ our Lord’ (Rom. 1:3–4).</p>
<p class="in">Similar to Acts, the resurrection as the charter of Jesus’ lordship testifies, within the Pauline corpus, to the salvific efficacy of his suffering and death. Moreover, this efficacy is not only seen within the resurrected Jesus himself, but also in the new life of the Holy Spirit given to those who now live in Christ. ‘If the Spirit of him who raised Jesus from the dead dwells in you, he who raised Christ from the dead will give life to your mortal bodies also through his Spirit that dwells in you’ (Rom. 8:11).</p>
<p class="in">Within the Gospel of John the efficacy of Jesus’ death on the cross is richly portrayed in a more symbolic, but nonetheless real, manner. Jesus’ obedience manifests that he is truly the Son of the Father (see Jn 4:34, 10:36–38). This is most fully witnessed in his being lifted up (see Jn 8:28). The ‘lifting up’ for John refers not only to the cross, but also to his resurrection and ascension. The hour of Jesus’ death is equally the hour of his glory, for in his death he will bring forth new life. ‘The hour has come for the Son of Man to be glorified. Very truly, I tell you, unless a grain of wheat falls into the earth and dies, it remains just a single grain; but if it dies, it bears much fruit’ (Jn 12:23–24; see also vv. 20–27). The implication is that the resurrection, and the abundance of life that it brings, is the direct result of the cross.</p>
<p class="in">Throughout John’s passion narrative Jesus is not seen as passively undergoing his passion and death. Rather, he is the primary actor and the one exercising ultimate authority. He ‘came forward’ to meet those who came to arrest him, and he initiated the questioning (see Jn 18:4). While he is handed over to be crucified, nonetheless he took the cross, he <a id="page_232" class="calibre3"></a>carried it himself, and he went, and was not led, to Golgotha (see Jn 19:16–17). Not surprisingly Jesus himself brought the salvific drama to a close. The Gospel of John reports that Jesus’ last words were ‘It is finished,’ that is, the saving work entrusted to him by the Father. Death did not come upon him and rob him of his life. He was not put to death. Rather, ‘he bowed his head and gave up his spirit’ (Jn 19:30).</p>
<p class="in">The active completion of his work and the active giving of his life to the Father is equally the cause of his active breathing forth of his spirit. The phrase ‘gave up his spirit’ (παρέδωκεν τò πνευ̑μα) is unique to the Gospel of John and is found nowhere else in antiquity as a description of death. The same breath in which Jesus put to death our sinful flesh (σάρξ), and, as the Lamb of God handed over his life to the Father in reparation for sin, is the same breath by which the Holy Spirit was poured out upon the world. For John, the last agonizing breath of Jesus, a life given in suffering love to the Father, was the first breath of new and eternal life for humanity. The ‘giving up his spirit’ then proceeds in two directions. It is given up to the Father, and simultaneously it is given up to the world. There is simultaneous causality here. The efficacy of Jesus’ death (the breathing forth of his spirit to the Father) is witnessed in his simultaneously breathing forth the Spirit upon the world. Jesus could not breathe forth his Spirit upon the world if his breathing forth of his spirit to the Father had not achieved humankind’s reconciliation. In the breathing forth of his life to the Father, Jesus procured for humankind the new breath of the Holy Spirit. The moment of Jesus’ death is then the moment of new life for it is his death that simultaneously gives rise to the new life. Again, we see that the Spirit could only come forth, and did only come forth, when Jesus was glorified (see Jn 7:39).</p>
<p class="in">Jesus died at the hour when the paschal lambs were being sacrificed in the temple, and not having his legs broken, since he was already dead, confirmed that he truly was the suffering sacrificial lamb of God who takes away the sin of the world (see Jn 19:32–35; Exod. 12:46, Jn 1:36). Moreover, the coming forth of blood and water from his pierced side also symbolized the efficacy of his sacrificial death. Having cleansed us in the outpouring of his blood (see 1 Jn 1:7; Lev. 17:11, 14) and so reconciling us to the Father, Jesus enabled us to share in the living water of his Spirit. The life-giving water of the Holy Spirit testified that his blood (the offering of his life) had atoned for humankind’s sins. The Father manifested the efficacy of this sacrifice in allowing the outpouring of the Holy Spirit.</p>
<p class="in">Likewise in the Gospel of John, Jesus appeared to his disciples on the first Easter evening. This is a resurrection account of what happened on the cross. Jesus, displaying the marks of suffering in his hands and side, twice greeted them with ‘Peace be with you’ (Jn 20:19, 21; also see 26). Peace is the immediate effect of Jesus’ death. He has reconciled humankind to the Father (see 1 Jn 2:2, 4:10), and so his Father has now become our Father (Jn 20:17). Moreover, similar to his action on the cross, Jesus, breathing upon the disciples, conferred upon them the Holy Spirit (Jn 20:22). This is the Johannine Pentecost, and it is reminiscent of the second creation story where God breathed his own very spirit into the first man (see Gen. 2:7). This spirit was lost through sin, but now Jesus, <a id="page_233" class="calibre3"></a>having atoned for that sin, once more recreates humankind as its risen glorified Lord through the breathing forth of the Holy Spirit (see Jn 7:39). Once more humankind can be born of the Spirit (see Jn 3:1–6). As John the Baptist had prophesied at the onset of the Gospel, it is the paschal Lamb of God who would baptize with the Holy Spirit (see Jn 1:29–34). This too testifies to the previous pattern. The cross necessarily gave rise to the resurrection which, in turn, necessarily entailed the sending forth of the new life of the Holy Spirit.<sup class="calibre6">28</sup></p>
<p class="in">Moreover, the Letter to the Hebrews specifies that the sacrificial nature of Jesus’ death accounts for his exalted risen status. ‘When he had made purification for sin, he sat down at the right hand of the Majesty on high, having become as much superior to angels as the name he has inherited is more excellent than theirs’ (Heb. 1:3–4). Though the Son was made for a while a little lower than the angels, he is now ‘crowned with glory and honour because of the suffering of death’ (Heb. 2:9). Jesus was made perfect through his suffering (see Heb. 2:10). Because the Son participated in our own sinful flesh, the offering of his own blood sanctified him (see Heb. 10:29). Through the offering of his life to the Father, he has become a priest ‘through the power of an indestructible life’ (Heb. 7:16). As high priest Jesus does not need to repeat his sacrifice, ‘this he did once for all when he offered himself.’ Thus, in raising him from the dead, the Father appointed him to be the eternal high priest, ‘a Son who has been made perfect forever’ (Heb. 7:27–28). Because of the joy held out <a id="page_234" class="calibre3"></a>to him, Jesus ‘endured the cross, disregarding its shame, and has taken his seat at the right hand of the throne of God’ (Heb. 12:2).</p>
<p class="in">Equally, the Book of Revelation proclaims clearly that Jesus is glorified as the risen Lord only because of his sacrificial death. It is the slain sacrificial Lamb who ransomed men for God, and who is therefore worthy to receive ‘power and wealth and wisdom and might and honour and glory and blessing’ (Rev. 5:6, 9–10, 12–13). The heavenly court worship the glorious and risen Jesus only because he merited such honor as the slain lamb. He who is Lord of lords and the King of kings, the Alpha and the Omega, the First and the Last is the one who is ‘clothed in a robe dipped in blood, and his name is called The Word of God’ (Rev. 19:13). It is the glory of the cross, the lamp of the risen Lamb, which illuminates the heavenly city (Rev. 21:22–23).</p>
<p class="in">In the above discussion it has become abundantly clear that the cross directly led to the resurrection which resulted in the outpouring of the Holy Spirit. Because Jesus suffered our condemnation, having put to death our sinful nature, and because he equally offered his holy life as a loving sacrifice to the Father, the Father has raised him gloriously from the dead. Being the risen Lord, he is now empowered to send forth the new life of the Holy Spirit. In the person of the resurrected Jesus himself the <i class="calibre5">eschaton</i> is now fully present and actualized, and so, in him, the end is beginning to be made available to all. It is here in the resurrected Jesus that the new eschatological life of the Spirit, a life that will be entirely free from suffering, because it is entirely free from sin, finds its beginning and its end. Moreover, we clearly and fully discern here, for the first time, what I noted at the onset of this chapter. Through his death and resurrection Jesus established a whole new salvific order. This new salvific order, while it arises from his redemptive work, is founded upon and discovered within the eschatological presence of the Holy Spirit.</p>
<p class="sec"><b class="calibre8">The Son of God Risen as a Complete Man</b></p>
<p class="pn">I have now argued, at some length, that the Father manifested his love for his incarnate Son and vindicated him by raising him from the dead. The Father raising Jesus from the dead was the direct result of the efficacy of the cross. Likewise, the eschatological outpouring of the Holy Spirit equally manifested the efficacy of Jesus’ death and confirmed his resurrection lordship. I want now to make one further important point which all the above has presupposed. Yet, while the above was founded upon this presupposition, it is only at this juncture that, I believe, it can truly be appreciated. I have presupposed throughout, and it was likely evident to the reader, that Jesus, in accordance with the New Testament, the Creeds, and the Christian tradition, was gloriously raised from the dead as a complete and entire man – body and soul. The Son of God is still incarnate, though now incarnate as a risen and glorious man. I do not want here to argue for the truth of this position, but simply to note its significance for our present study.</p>
<p class="in">First, it was as man that the Son of God suffered and died and so, if the Father was to manifest his love for his incarnate Son, he must do so by raising his Son from the dead as a complete man – body and soul. Jesus’ <a id="page_235" class="calibre3"></a>suffering involved real physical pain and authentic emotional trauma, and if the Father did not raise him from the dead as a man, it would mean that this genuine human suffering was of no interest to him. However, it is precisely in physically raising his Son from the dead as a complete man that the Father absolutely confirmed his love for and pleasure in his Son as incarnate. Simply put, the Father demonstrated his love for the human historical Jesus, for who he is as his incarnate Son and for all that he had done as man, by raising the human historical Jesus – the man Jesus – gloriously from the dead.</p>
<p class="in">Second, the Father vindicated his incarnate Son and revealed the efficacy of his suffering and death by gloriously raising him from the dead as man. In the resurrection the Father verified that it was truly the genuineness of his Son’s human suffering and death which conquered sin and death and so secured the new life of the Holy Spirit. The Father, in raising Jesus from the dead as a complete man – body and soul – so that he now exists as an authentic glorious man, confirmed that what he genuinely suffered – physically and emotionally – as an authentic man was indeed of salvific significance. The bodily resurrection testifies that what the Son of God did and experienced as a man, especially within his suffering and death, was the means by which the whole of human life, including suffering and death, was redeemed and so transformed. If the Son of God is not a risen glorious man, then we who are humans are not saved in accordance with who we are – bodily creatures.</p>
<p class="in">Third then, without Jesus’ bodily resurrection, salvation would consist of a Platonic flight, a breaking free, from this material world of bodily and emotional suffering and physical death to a better and more authentic spiritual and disembodied realm of existence.<sup class="calibre6">29</sup> If, after his human death, the Son of God merely continued to exist as God, or if the resurrection merely consisted of some sort of spiritual, in the sense of immaterial, existence, or if the resurrection merely consisted of the subjective experience or event within the hearts and minds of his disciples and not actually an experience or event which happened to Jesus himself, then it would mean that his human suffering and death were ultimately unimportant and salvifically insignificant. They would merely be the sad but necessary path of escape. Human life, with its suffering and its finality of death, is not then something that can be redeemed but only something that must be endured and finally relinquished and abandoned. Without the resurrection of Jesus as a full and glorious man the absurdity and meaninglessness of human suffering would still prevail.</p>
<p class="in">Fourth, as we saw above and as will become even more evident in what follows, the glorious resurrection of the Son of God as a complete man is the means by which not only his human life was transformed and made new, but also the means by which the lives of all human beings can <a id="page_236" class="calibre3"></a>be transformed and made new. The resurrection of Jesus as a complete man – body and soul – affirms, as we will see in the next chapter, not only that Jesus’ suffering and death was significant, but also that the suffering and death of every human person is of eternal value and worth. Thus we grasp that the traditional doctrine of Jesus’ resurrection as a glorious man is not tangential to our concerns here, but central, for the bodily resurrection of Jesus ensures that the whole of human life, even suffering and death, is of value and ultimately redeemable.</p>
<p class="in">Fifth, since it was the Son of God as man who suffered and died in order to obtain salvation, it must now be the Son of God as the risen and glorious man who pours out the Holy Spirit. If it is not the Son of God as the risen man who makes present the eschatological Spirit, then it would mean that it was not as man that he obtained our salvation. If the Son of God, as the risen man, does not send forth the Spirit, then what he did as man, in his suffering and death, was not the means by which he obtained his risen lordship so as to be empowered and authorized to send forth the Spirit. As it was as man that the Son died on our behalf reconciling us to the Father, so it is now as the risen man that the Son makes available the fruit of his human suffering and death in the new life of the Holy Spirit.</p>
<p class="in">What difference, then, does the new eschatological life of the Spirit make to those who believe? What happens to the person who appropriates in faith Jesus’ salvation? What transpires within the person who possesses the Holy Spirit? What is it like to live within this new salvific order? Most importantly for our present study, how does the Christian believer now experience and interpret suffering? Before we can address the last question, we must first examine the transforming effects of the new life of the Holy Spirit within the life of the Christian.</p>
<p class="sec"><b class="calibre8">Being a New Creation in Christ</b></p>
<p class="pn">To enter into the new salvific order is primarily to become a new creation in Christ through the indwelling Spirit.</p>
<p class="in">We have seen that Jesus, through his death and resurrection, underwent a marvelous transformation. Now the good news is that those who come to faith in Jesus and are baptized undergo this same transformation.</p>
<p class="bq1">How can we who died to sin go on living in it? Do you not know that all of us who have been baptized into Christ Jesus were baptized into his death? Therefore we have been buried with him by baptism into death, so that, just as Christ was raised from the dead by the glory of the Father, so we too might walk in newness of life. For if we have been united with him in a death like his, we will certainly be united with him in a resurrection like his. We know that our old self was crucified with him so that the body of sin might be destroyed, and we might no longer be enslaved to sin. For whoever has died is freed from sin. But if we have died with Christ, we believe that we will also live with him. We know that Christ, being raised from the dead, will never die again; death no longer has dominion over him. The death <a id="page_237" class="calibre3"></a>he died, he died to sin, once for all; but the life he lives, he lives to God. So you also must consider yourselves dead to sin and alive to God in Christ Jesus (Rom. 6:2–11).</p>
<p class="in">Paul’s logic here is straightforward. The Son of God, having assumed our fallen humanity, put our ‘old self’ to death on the cross. In rising from the dead he was freed from that fallen humanity with its dominion of death, and now lives gloriously as a new man unto God. Through baptism Christians participate in this same transformation. We are ‘baptized into his death’ not just figuratively or symbolically, but rather we are actually inserted into his very act of dying. We are truly ‘buried with him,’ literally – ‘co-buried’ (συνετάϕημεν) with him, and so share the same grave. If ‘one has died for all, therefore all have died’ (2 Cor. 5:14). Therefore, our own sinful nature is put to death, and we too are then freed from sin with its condemnation. Equally through baptism, we share in his resurrection, and so can ‘walk in newness of life.’ We are not then saved by any works of righteousness, ‘but according to his mercy, through the water of rebirth and renewal by the Holy Spirit’ (Titus 3:5; see Heb. 10:22). Thus, Christians must consider themselves ‘dead to sin and alive to God in Christ Jesus.’</p>
<p class="in">This same pattern of thought appears in the Letter to the Colossians.</p>
<p class="bq1">In him also you were circumcised with a spiritual circumcision, by putting off the body of the flesh in the circumcision of Christ; when you were buried with him in baptism, you were also raised with him through faith in the power of God, who raised him from the dead. And when you were dead in trespasses and the uncircumcision of your flesh, God made you alive together with him, when he forgave us all our trespasses, erasing the record that stood against us with its legal demands. He set this aside, nailing it to the cross. He disarmed the rulers and authorities and made a public example of them, triumphing over them in it. Col. 2:11–15.</p>
<p class="in">Circumcision in the Old Testament was understood as the external sign of the covenant (see Gen. 17:9–14). To be circumcised was to be cut free from sin and all unholiness, and to be set apart for God (see Lev. 26:41; Deut. 10:16; Jer. 4:4). The Christian, through baptism, experiences the true spiritual circumcision. As Christ was circumcised of his sinful flesh, having nailed it to the cross, and as he rose in the holiness of his resurrected humanity, so Christians now in baptism also put off the body of sinful flesh and are raised to live a new life with God in Christ. ‘If we have died with him, we will also live with him’ (2 Tim. 2:11).</p>
<p class="in">Johannine theology is similar to the Pauline corpus. Jesus assured Nicodemus: ‘Very truly, I tell you, no one can see the Kingdom of God without being born from above’ (Jn 3:3). To be born from above demands that one be born of water and Spirit. ‘What is born of the flesh is flesh and what is born of the Spirit is spirit’ (Jn 3:7). Within Johannine theology one is born naturally of sinful flesh and must be reborn of the Spirit in order to enter into the eternal life of God’s kingdom. The implication being then that in so being born again one puts off the flesh and becomes a new creation in the Spirit.</p>
<p class="in"><a id="page_238" class="calibre3"></a>What must be grasped clearly here is that the Son of God, having assumed our sinful flesh and having put it to death on the cross, rose as a new and glorious man now set free from sin and all its effects. Through his resurrection then the Son of God incarnate presently lives as an entirely new man. The Son of God is still a man but now he is a new kind of man – a risen and glorious man. When Christians appropriate Jesus’ salvation through baptism, this very same event takes place within them. Through the indwelling Spirit, they abide in the risen Christ and so share in his risen humanity. ‘If anyone is in Christ, there is a new creation: everything old has passed away; see, everything has become new! … For our sake he [God] made him to be sin who knew no sin, so that in him we might become the righteousness of God’ (2 Cor. 5:11, 21; see Gal. 6:15). Because of Jesus’ single offering ‘he has perfected for all time those who are sanctified’ (Heb. 10:14).</p>
<p class="in">Christians prior to conversion may have been fornicators, idolaters, and drunkards, but now ‘you were washed, you were sanctified, you were justified in the name of the Lord Jesus Christ and in the Spirit of our God’ (1 Cor. 6:11; see Eph. 5:26). Christians are still men and women, but now they have been radically transformed. They differ from those who are not Christian not simply in degree but in kind, for unlike those who are not Christian, their sinful nature has died, and they have become, through the Holy Spirit, new men and women in Christ. ‘You are not in the flesh, you are in the Spirit, since the Spirit of God dwells in you’ (Rom. 8:9; see 8:11). Being a new creation in Christ, and so living within the new salvific order, has other profound ramifications for the kind of life Christians live.</p>
<p class="sec"><b class="calibre8">Living in Christ</b></p>
<p class="pn">First, Christians are forgiven their sins and freed from sin’s condemnation (see Col. 1:14): ‘There is therefore now no condemnation for those who are in Christ Jesus’ (Rom. 8:1). While Christians may continue to sin, their sin need no longer fashion them into enemies of God. Jesus, the risen High Priest, continually makes intercession for those who approach God (see Heb. 7:25). They are liberated from the bondage of sin and have become slaves of righteousness (see Rom. 6:18, 20–22). Through the Spirit they have been set free ‘from the law of sin and death’ (Rom. 8:2).</p>
<p class="in">Second and more positively, Christians are, through faith and baptism, and not through works, justified, made righteous and holy before God (see Rom. 1:17, 3:28, 4:5; Gal. 2:16, 3:8; Phil. 3:9). Thus they possess the ability both to abandon sin and to live in the freedom of the Spirit. ‘For freedom Christ has set us free’ (Gal. 5:1). This new freedom, first of all, empowers Christians to have new minds and to think in a new kind of way. In the Spirit, they have taken on the very mind of Christ (see 1 Cor. 2). Because Christians have already been raised with Christ at the Father’s right hand, they are able to set their minds not on things of this world but on things above (see Col. 3:1–2). Their minds are renewed so that they can do the will of God – ‘what is good and acceptable and perfect’ (Rom. 12:2). Moreover then, because of their renewed minds, Christians are able to live lives of virtue. They are God’s workmanship, <a id="page_239" class="calibre3"></a>created in Christ ‘for good works’ (Eph. 2:10). ‘You were taught to put away your former way of life, your old self (τòν παλαιòν ἄνθρωπον), corrupt and deluded by its lusts, and to be renewed in the spirit of your minds, and to clothe yourselves with the new self (τòν καινòν ἄνθρωπον), created according to the likeness of God in true righteousness and holiness’ (Eph. 4:22–24). Christians no longer do the deeds of the flesh, but rather they do the deeds of the Spirit (see Rom. 8:5–6), and they do so for they are no longer ‘in the flesh,’ but ‘in the Spirit’ for the Spirit of God dwells in them (Rom. 8:9). Their daily lives consist in putting to death the deeds of the flesh and living by the Spirit (see Rom. 8:13). In so doing Christians bear the fruit of the Spirit – love, joy, peace, patience, etc. (see Gal. 5:19–23).</p>
<p class="in">Third, as his brothers and sisters, Christians share the same intimacy with the Father as Jesus the Son. Because Christians have died and risen with Christ, and so live in him through the indwelling of the Holy Spirit, their relationship with the Father has not just improved by degree, but has changed in kind. Not only are they reconciled to God and so are at peace with him, but being new creations in Christ, they also have been transformed by the indwelling Spirit of sonship into sons of the Father. They are able to call out, in union with the Son, ‘<i class="calibre5">Abba</i>, Father’ (Gal. 4:6; Rom. 8:15). The prayer that Jesus taught his disciples bears witness to this singular privilege. They are entitled to call God ‘Our Father’ (see Mt 6:9; Lk 11:2; Jn 20:17). Moreover, the same Spirit which conforms Christians into his children, equally pours out the paternal love of the Father into their hearts (see Rom. 5:5). According to the Gospel of John, Jesus prayed that, since he has made his Father known to his disciples, the very love of the Father, with which he himself is loved, would be in them (see Jn 17:26). The marvelous truth is that Christians are incorporated into the life of the Trinity itself, and so share in the divine relationships by which the Father, the Son and the Holy Spirit are the one God. In Christ the Son, Christians possess, as his brothers and sisters through the Spirit of sonship, the same Father.</p>
<p class="in">Christians are then no longer strangers or aliens, ‘but members of the household of God’ (Eph. 2:20). They have become God’s holy people set apart as his own possession (see Eph. 1:14; Col. 1:12; 1 Pet. 2:9–10). The very curtain of the temple dividing the holy God from his unholy people has been rent in two (see Mt 27:51; Exod. 26:31–33). Having been purified by the blood of Jesus and cleansed in the waters of baptism, they confidently enter into the very heavenly sanctuary of God (see Heb. 10:19–23). They become the very temple of God (ναος του̑ θεου̑) where the Holy Spirit resides (see 1 Cor. 3:16–17, 6:19). Within this living temple they, with Christ, offer spiritual worship to the Father (see 1 Pet. 2:4–10; Eph. 2:22; Jn 4:20–24).</p>
<p class="in">Fourth, the relationship among Christians radically differs from their relationship with those who are not Christian. To live together in Christ as children of the Father in and through the Holy Spirit is a new and singular kind of relationship. Christians, whether Jews or Greeks, have become one new man in Christ (see Eph. 2:15). Therefore, together in Christ, ‘both of us have access in one Spirit to the Father’ (Eph. 2:18). In Christ all Christians, through the Spirit of sonship, have one common <a id="page_240" class="calibre3"></a>Father. So radical is this union that there is no longer Jew or Greek, slave or free, male or female for all are ‘one in Christ Jesus’ (Gal. 3:28; see Rom. 10:12; 1 Cor. 12:13; Col. 3:11). The whole social order – husbands/wives, parents/children, masters/slaves – must be reconceived in the light of sharing a common life in Christ (see Eph. 5:21—6:9; Col. 3:18—4:1, Philemon).</p>
<p class="in">This whole realignment of the divine and social orders – the Christian’s relationship with God and with one’s fellow Christians – is predicated upon the fact that Christians, together with Christ their head, form one body in and through the one Spirit (see Rom. 12:4–5; 1 Cor. 12:12–13). While it is through faith and baptism that this relationship is established, it is most fully expressed and nurtured within the Eucharist (see 1 Cor. 10:15–17, 11:27–32).</p>
<p class="in">Fifth, in the light of becoming a new creation in Christ through the indwelling Spirit, Christians live in anticipation both of Jesus’ return in glory and of their own resurrection. The Son of Man will come with great glory and power to gather his elect (see Mt 24:30–31) and to judge the living and the dead (see 2 Tim. 4:1; 1 Pet. 4:5). Now the whole of creation is groaning waiting to share in the glorious freedom of the children of God (see Rom. 8:19–22). Christians themselves, ‘who have the first fruits of the Spirit,’ presently groan as they ‘await for adoption, the redemption of our bodies’ (Rom. 8:23). When Jesus comes at the end of time, he will complete the good work that has already begun in those who believe (see Phil. 1:6). ‘Christ, having been offered once to bear the sins of many, will appear a second time, not to deal with sin, but to save those who are eagerly waiting for him’ (Heb. 9:28). Through his own resurrection Christ is the first fruit of redemption, ‘then at his coming those who belong to him’ (1 Cor. 15:23; see 1 Thess. 4:16). Already Christians are citizens of heaven, and it is from there that they await their Savior, the Lord Jesus. ‘He will transform the body of our humiliation that it may be conformed to the body of his glory, by the power that also enables him to make all things subject to himself’ (Phil. 3:20–21). The indwelling of the Holy Spirit, the same Spirit through whom the Father raised Jesus from the dead, is ‘the guarantee’ and the ‘first instalment’ of the Christian’s future resurrected inheritance (Eph. 1:14; 2 Cor. 1:22; see Rom. 8:11). What has been sown in perishability, dishonour, and weakness will be raised imperishable, in glory and in the fulness of power (see 1 Cor. 15:42–44, 53–54). ‘Just as we have born the image of the man of dust, we will also bear the image of the man of heaven’ (1 Cor. 15:49). Because Christians have already died with Christ, and their present life is now hidden with Christ, when he appears, then they will also appear with him in glory (see Col. 1:2–3).<sup class="calibre6">30</sup> With the coming of Jesus in glory and power all of his enemies, including death itself, will be vanquished and he will hand over the kingdom to his Father (see 1 Cor. 15:24–28; Eph. 1:20–23; Heb. 1:13—2:9).</p>
<p class="in"><a id="page_241" class="calibre3"></a>The final coming of Jesus in glory with our concomitant resurrection is of the utmost importance for this study. Eternal life within the Trinity is the ultimate consequence of Jesus’ suffering, for through his suffering he obtained both his and our resurrection. Thus, when Jesus returns in glory, he will bring to a just and glorious close all human suffering. Sin, the cause of all suffering and death, will completely end. ‘The sting of death is sin, and the power of sin is the law. But thanks be to God, who gives us the victory through our Lord Jesus Christ’ (1 Cor. 15:56–57). The Lamb, who had himself sacrificed his life, will be the one who will wipe away every tear (see Rev. 7:17). ‘Death will be no more; mourning and crying and pain will be no more, for the first things have passed away’ (Rev. 21:4). There will be a new heaven and a new earth (see 2 Pet. 3:13; Rev. 21:1). This is why the Christian church, the bride of Christ, in the midst of its and the world’s present suffering, cries out in the Spirit: ‘Come, Lord Jesus!’ (Rev. 22:17–20).<sup class="calibre6">31</sup></p>
<p class="in">One final point must be made before we conclude this chapter. I have stressed that the new life in the Spirit brings about changes in kind and not simply in degree. It is these changes in kind which make up the new salvific order.<sup class="calibre6">32</sup> Christians, through the indwelling Spirit, have become new creations in Christ, and thus they possess a new kind of relationship <a id="page_242" class="calibre3"></a>with the Father and among themselves. However, the heavenly resurrected life will only differ in degree from the life Christians presently possess and experience. The heavenly life is but the glorious fulfilment of the life already begun here on earth within the present salvific order. There Christians will become fully recreated in Christ and so, in the Spirit, obtain full communion with the Father and with one another.</p>
<p class="sec"><b class="calibre8">Conclusion</b></p>
<p class="pn">I trust that I have presented an accurate, if not complete, account of the great drama of salvation. I have done so at some length in order to manifest all its various aspects, and equally to demonstrate how these aspects form the one grand salvific event. I have likewise presented, in some detail, the fruit of this redemptive work in the lives of those who believe and are baptized. In so doing I hope that, at least in some small way, the brilliance and magnificence of this redemptive work, with its abounding efficacy, shines forth in all its splendor.</p>
<p class="in">This was my desire, for Jesus is the Father’s decisive and ultimate response to human suffering. In the light of Jesus as the risen Lord, human suffering is newly conceived and radically transformed through the Holy Spirit. This is especially so for those who now live in Christ. It is to this soteriological theme that we now turn.</p>
<p class="ntcon">1  In primarily employing biblical terms and concepts, I am attempting to avoid presenting some specific ‘model’ or ‘theory’ of salvation. While there are various aspects or elements to Christ’s redemptive work, no one salvific model or theory can adequately express the whole of this work. Only the unity of the various biblical aspects can account for an adequate understanding of Jesus’ saving work. I do not wish then that what I propose here be seen as some theory or model. Equally, I am trying to avoid the classifications that are normally attached to such theories or models, such as, ‘The Satisfaction Theory,’ ‘The Ransom Model,’ ‘The <i class="calibre5">Christus Victor</i> Model,’ ‘The Exemplar Model,’ or ‘The Penal Substitution Theory.’ While such classifications have some legitimacy and value, because of the history and controversy surrounding them, I believe they would only confuse what I am attempting to do here. Thus, I will not attempt any full critique of the various theories or models, but limit myself to quoting authors who, on the whole, support a specific point I wish to make. Here I merely wish to give authentic weight to various elements that make up the biblical account of salvation.</p>
<p class="ntnl">For modern studies of the various soteriological theories and models that have been proposed within Christian theology, see G. Aulen, <i class="calibre5">Christus Victor</i> (London: SPCK, 1931); R. Cessario, <i class="calibre5">The Godly Image: Christ and Salvation in Catholic Thought from Anselm to Aquinas</i> (Petersham: St Bede’s Publications, 1990); R. Culpepper, <i class="calibre5">Interpreting the Atonement</i> (Grand Rapids: Eerdmans, 1966); F.W. Dillistone, <i class="calibre5">The Christian Understanding of the Atonement</i> (London: James Nisbet, 1968); P. Fiddes, <i class="calibre5">Past Event and Present Salvation: The Christian Idea of Atonement</i> (London: Darton, Longman &amp; Todd, 1989); J. McIntyre, <i class="calibre5">The Shape of Soteriology</i> (Edinburgh: T &amp; T Clark, 1992); L. Richard, <i class="calibre5">The Mystery of Redemption</i> (Baltimore: Helicon, 1965); J. Rivière, <i class="calibre5">The Doctrine of the Atonement: A Historical Essay</i> (London: Kegan Paul, 1909); H.E.W. Turner, <i class="calibre5">The Patristic Doctrine of Redemption</i> (London: Mowbray, 1952).</p>
<p class="ntnl">While I wish to employ scriptural terms and concepts with clarity and with some precision, for the most part I am not able, in this study, to give a detailed exegesis of the various passages noting the diverse interpretations and the exegetical problems associated with them. Likewise, I cannot give detailed accounts of the biblical and extra-biblical use of such concepts as: ransom, sacrifice, expiation, and propitiation. Nonetheless, I hope that what I have to say will be in accord with genuine scholarship.</p>
<p class="ntnl">Besides the standard biblical dictionaries, for a good exposition of the biblical terms and concepts related to salvation, see S. Lyonnet and L. Sabourin, <i class="calibre5">Sin, Redemption, and Sacrifice: A Biblical and Patristic Study</i> (Rome: Biblical Institute Press, 1970). See also S.B. Clark, <i class="calibre5">Redeemer</i> (Ann Arbor: Servant Publications, 1992); M. Hengel, <i class="calibre5">The Atonement: A Study of the Origin of the Doctrine in the New Testament</i> (London: SCM, 1981), <i class="calibre5">The Cross of the Son</i> (London: SCM, 1986); D.R. Jones, ‘Sacrifice and Holiness’ in <i class="calibre5">Sacrifice and Redemption</i>, pp. 9–21; V. Taylor, <i class="calibre5">Forgiveness and Reconciliation: A Study in New Testament Theology</i> (London: Macmillan, 1946), <i class="calibre5">The Atonement in New Testament Teaching</i> (London: Epworth, 1958), <i class="calibre5">Jesus and His Sacrifice</i> (London: Macmillan, 1959); F. Young, <i class="calibre5">Sacrifice and the Death of Christ</i> (London: SCM, 1983).</p>
<p class="ntnlf">2  The term ‘because,’ in the sense of ‘being the cause of’ or ‘bringing about an effect’ will be an important concept in this chapter.</p>
<p class="ntnl">M. Winter comments that many modern theologians, such as K. Barth, J.P. Galvin, H.E.W. Turner, D.M. Baillie, F.W. Dillistone, C. Gunton, and M. Hengel, are in agreement that the New Testament ‘does not tell us how the atonement was effected, yet they offer no explanation of it themselves to compensate for that omission. Ironically, it is precisely this explanation which is so badly needed by the modern reader, who finds the violent death of Jesus so repugnant.’ <i class="calibre5">The Atonement</i> (London: Geoffrey Chapman, 1995), p. 30. See pp. 30–37.</p>
<p class="ntnl">I hope to show that the New Testament does offer an account of the causal workings and connections of Jesus’ passion, death, and resurrection. Winter himself limits the efficacy of Jesus’ death to his role as an intercessor, obtaining our forgiveness and new life with God. While this may be true, it is hardly a full and adequate expression of the rich biblical proclamation.</p>
<p class="ntnlf">3  Jesus may have performed more than three actions through his death on the cross, nonetheless, here I will be limiting my discussion to these three. While most of what I will be saying here is new, it should be noted that I am developing some of the ideas that I discussed in my book, <i class="calibre5">In the Likeness of Sin ful Flesh</i>.</p>
<p class="ntnlf">4  Pope John Paul II states that love is ‘the fullest source of the answer to the question of the meaning of suffering. This answer has been given by God to man in the cross of Jesus Christ.’ <i class="calibre5">Salvifici Doloris</i>, n. 13.</p>
<p class="ntnlf">5  Hans Urs von Balthasar states that Jesus’ sinful humanity provided the vital bond between the Incarnation and the cross. ‘He who says Incarnation, also says Cross’ (<i class="calibre5">Mysterium Paschale</i>, p. 22). Thus, ‘to “take on manhood” means in fact to assume its concrete destiny with all that entails – suffering death, hell – in solidarity with every human being’ (p. 20). For von Balthasar’s complete argument see pp. 11–48. See also <i class="calibre5">The Von Balthasar Reader</i>, eds M. Kehl and W. Loser (New York: Crossroad, 1982), pp. 144–50. Von Balthasar also discusses Jesus taking on our condemnation in the light of the teaching of the Fathers. See <i class="calibre5">Theo-Drama IV: The Action</i>, p. 349–54. See also Pope John Paul II, <i class="calibre5">Salvifici Doloris</i>, n. 14.</p>
<p class="ntnlf">6  This passage from the Letter to the Hebrews is normally translated: ‘We see Jesus, who for a little while was made lower than the angels, crowned with glory and honour because of the suffering of death, so that by the grace of God (χάριτι θεου̑) he might taste death for everyone.’ Some ancient manuscripts have an alternative rendering: ‘so that apart from God (χωρίς θεου̑) he might taste death for us.’ This alternative, it seems to me, better states in what manner Jesus tasted death. He could taste the full reality of death only if he experienced being ‘apart from God.’</p>
<p class="ntnlf">7  It is frequently argued that if God is all loving and good, then the obstinant sinner could still experience the mercy and compassion of God, and even obtain heaven. A loving God would never permit, sanction or tolerate hell. This is the thesis of those who espouse a universalist notion of salvation – all will ultimately be saved. Such a view, rather than upholding a loving and good God actually repudiates a loving and good God. A loving and good God could never permit, sanction, or tolerate unrepentant sin and all of the ungodliness that it entails. If he did so, he would become evil, for to sanction or even tolerate evil is to be evil Such a view would demand that all the horrendous evil perpetrated throughout history, including the Holocaust, is of no real concern or consequence to God. In the end, he could not care less. However, the whole of biblical revelation manifests that Yahweh, unlike the pagan gods, is absolutely holy, good and loving, and thus he demands such virtues of those created in his likeness. The goodness and love of God demand then the actual possibility of eternal damnation. The real possibility of hell testifies to the intrinsic value and worth of human beings, a value and worth so great that these cannot be violated without eternal consequences. Equally, hell upholds the dignity of human freedom even in relationship to God. God so respects the dignity of human freedom that he will not transgress it even if one uses it to become ungodly. Hell, with its experience of the wrath of God, is then but a necessary expression of his perfect goodness and love. Christians must hope that all are saved, but they cannot hope that hell does not exist.</p>
<p class="ntnlf">8  Jesus’ experience of the wrath of God should not then be interpreted in what is commonly, though unfairly, understood as the classic Reformation (Lutheran) view, that is, that God took out his wrath on Jesus rather than on us. It is because of sin, and not because of God, that one experiences God as wrathful, and one does so precisely because God is good and loving and the sinner is not. Thus Jesus, in assuming our sinful flesh and with it our condemnation, experienced the wrath of God as a consequence of so doing, and not because God purposefully avenged or sated his wrath upon him. I am thus not comfortable when von Balthasar states that ‘God unloaded his wrath upon the Man’ (<i class="calibre5">Theo-Drama IV: The Action</i>, p. 345). Nonetheless, I would agree with von Balthasar when he argues for Jesus’ ‘Holy Saturday’ experience, which forms a major theme within his own christology. ‘Jesus does not only accept the (to be sure, accursed) mortal destiny of Adam. He also, quite expressly, carries the sin of the human race and, with those sins, the “second death” of God-abandonment.’ <i class="calibre5">Mysterium Paschale</i>, p. 90. See also pp. 148–88. Von Balthasar concurs with K. Barth that the Son of God actually suffered ‘the wrath of God that we merited’ (<i class="calibre5">Theo-Drama IV: The Action</i>, p. 346). See also pp. 339–51. For Barth see <i class="calibre5">Church Dogmatics</i>, II/1 p. 396.</p>
<p class="ntnl">Pope John Paul II states:</p>
<p class="bq1f">Together with this horrible weight, <i class="calibre5">encompassing</i> the ‘entire’ evil <i class="calibre5">of the turning away from God</i> which is contained in sin, Christ, through the divine depth of his filial union with the Father, perceives in a humanly inexpressible way <i class="calibre5">this suffering which is the separation</i>, the rejection <i class="calibre5">by the Father</i>, the estrangement from God. <i class="calibre5">Salvifici Doloris</i>, n. 18.</p>
<p class="ntnl">It should be noted that while the Son, as man, experienced the full weight of our condemnation, he did not have the mind of a condemned sinner. The damned find God to be utterly loathsome and detestable, for he embodies all that is abhorrent to the condemned sinner – goodness, holiness and love. Jesus, in the midst of his abandonment, maintained a firm love of his Father and trusted that his Father would restore his loving presence. While Jesus, through Psalm 22, gave voice to this abandonment, yet this same psalm expressed his trust and confidence in God’s merciful power to rescue him. Though his experience was that of one of being abandoned, yet, in faith and trust, he was assured, despite all appearances, of his Father’s unimpaired love. His ‘<i class="calibre5">Abba</i>’ prayer in Gethsemane (the only place in the Gospels where such an intimate prayer is explicitly expressed) also manifested this trust in his loving Father (<i class="calibre5">Abba</i>), despite the seeming evidence and real emotions to the contrary. This too is the same point made in the Letter to the Hebrews. ‘In the days of his [the Son’s] flesh, he offered up prayers and supplications, with loud cries and tears, to the one who was able to save him from death, and he was heard because of his reverent submission’ (5:7).</p>
<p class="ntnlf">9  Aquinas expresses this same thought with regards to Jesus’ descent into hell. ‘Since it was fitting for Christ to die in order to deliver us from death, so it was fitting for him to descend into hell in order to deliver us also from going down into hell’ (<i class="calibre5">ST</i>, III, 52, 1). However, this bold statement appears to be mitigated, or even contradicted, in the next article.</p>
<p class="ntnl">T.F. Torrance also states that Christ must take upon himself our sin and guilt, if he is to save us from it. See <i class="calibre5">The Mediation of Christ</i>, p. 39.</p>
<p class="ntnl">See also von Balthasar’s discussion of ‘vicarious punishment’ within the Fathers and modern authors (<i class="calibre5">Theo-Drama IV: The Action</i>, pp. 290–98).</p>
<p class="ntull">10  It is well known that some of the Fathers construed the ransom as being paid to the devil so that he would release humankind. See Origen, <i class="calibre5">Commentariorum in Matthaeum</i>, 16, 8; Gregory of Nyssa, <i class="calibre5">Oratio Catechetica</i>, 21–24; and Augustine, <i class="calibre5">De Trinitate</i>, 13, 15–22. However, this is to misconstrue the analogy. Jesus ransomed humankind from the bondage of sin and death, not by ‘buying off’ Satan, but by reconciling us to God. Such a reconciling action set humankind free from the condemnation of sin and death. See Gregory of Nazianzus’ refutation of Nyssa’s interpretation, <i class="calibre5">Oratio</i>, 45, 22. For a study of the biblical notion of ‘ransom’ and ‘redemption’ see S. Lyonnet, <i class="calibre5">Sin, Redemption, and Sacrifice</i>, pp. 79–103.</p>
<p class="ntull">11  See J.D.G. Dunn, ‘Paul’s Understanding of the Death of Jesus as Sacrifice’ in <i class="calibre5">Sacrifice and Redemption</i>, pp. 35–56.</p>
<p class="ntull">12  For a more complete study of the biblical notion of ‘expiation’ and the sacrificial nature of Jesus’ death, see S. Lyonnet, <i class="calibre5">Sin, Redemption, and Sacrifice</i>, pp. 120–84.</p>
<p class="ntull">13  Aquinas stresses that it is love that makes Jesus’ sacrifice supremely efficacious. See <i class="calibre5">ST</i>, III, 48, 2–3.</p>
<p class="ntnl">It can rightly be said that during his human life Jesus grew in his love for humankind. Love is not merely expressed in loving deeds, but it is equally in the very doing of these loving deeds that love matures. Thus, the cross is not merely the consummate expression of Jesus’ love for us, but it is equally on the cross that he enacted, and so attained, the full maturity of his love for us. ‘Greater love has no man than this, that a man lay down his life for his friends’ (Jn 15:13). The cross did manifest Jesus’ ‘greater love,’ but he manifested it only because on the cross he achieved it. If he had not laid down his life for us, Jesus would not have possessed nor would he have attained this ‘greater love.’</p>
<p class="ntull">14  Torrance writes:</p>
<p class="bq1f">Both Liberals and Fundamentalists, however, react with a kind of shock when the humanity of Jesus and substitution are linked together for they have not a little difficulty with the idea that it is <i class="calibre5">as man</i> that Jesus Christ takes our place, acts on our behalf and in our stead, and that it is precisely as man that God himself comes to us in the Incarnation. <i class="calibre5">The Mediation of Christ</i>, p. 81.</p>
<p class="ntull">15  Again Aquinas emphasizes that it is only because of the Son’s solidarity with us as man, and therefore as the Head of the Church, that salvation comes to those united to him. ‘Christ’s passion causes forgiveness of sins by way of redemption. For since he is our head, then, by the passion which he endured from love and obedience, he delivered us as his members from our sins, as by the price of his passion.’ <i class="calibre5">ST</i>, III, 49, 1. See also <i class="calibre5">ST</i>, III, 48, 1; 48, 2, ad 1; 49, 3, ad 3.</p>
<p class="ntull">16  Commenting on Isaiah 53, Pope John Paul II writes:</p>
<p class="bq1f">Even more than this description of the passion, what strikes us in the words of the prophet is <i class="calibre5">the depth of Christ’s sacrifice</i>. Behold, he, though innocent, takes upon himself the sins of all. ‘The Lord has laid on him the iniquity of us all’: <i class="calibre5">all</i> human sin in its breadth and depth becomes the true cause of the Redeemer’s suffering. If the suffering ‘is measured’ by the evil suffered, then the words of the prophet enable us to understand <i class="calibre5">the extent of this evil</i> and suffering with which Christ burdened himself. It can be said that this is ‘substitutive’ suffering; but above all it is ‘redemptive.’ The Man of Sorrows of that prophecy is truly that ‘Lamb of God who takes away the sin of the world.’ In his suffering, sins are cancelled out precisely because he alone as the only-begotten Son could take them upon himself, accept them <i class="calibre5">with that love for the Father which overcomes</i> the evil of every sin; in a certain sense he annihilates this evil in the spiritual space of the relationship between God and humanity, and fills this space with good. <i class="calibre5">Salvifici Doloris</i>, n. 17.</p>
<p class="ntull">17  Pope John Paul II emphasizes that damnation, due to sin, is ‘the definitive suffering.’ Thus Christ’s death on the cross ‘strikes evil right at its transcendental roots,’ that is, sin and death, ‘for they are at the basis of the loss of eternal life.’ <i class="calibre5">Salvifici Doloris</i>, n. 14. Also see n. 15.</p>
<p class="ntull">18  Aquinas succinctly summarizes many of the causal connections within Christ’s passion and death.</p>
<p class="bq1f">Christ’s passion, according as it is compared with his Godhead, operates in an efficient manner: but in so far as it is compared with the will of Christ’s soul it acts in a meritorious manner: considered as being within Christ’s very flesh, it acts by way of satisfaction, inasmuch as we are liberated by it from the debt of punishment; while inasmuch as we are freed from the servitude of guilt, it acts by way of redemption: but in so far as we are reconciled with God it acts by way of sacrifice. <i class="calibre5">ST</i>, III, 48, 6, ad 3.</p>
<p class="ntull">19  Aquinas states: ‘Christ’s passion wrought our salvation, properly speaking, by removing evils; but the resurrection did so as the beginning and exemplar of all good things.’ <i class="calibre5">ST</i>., III, 53, 1, ad 3. See also the entire article.</p>
<p class="ntull">20  See <a href="08_Chapter01.xhtml" class="calibre3">Chapter 1</a>.</p>
<p class="ntull">21  H.U. von Balthasar also sees Moltmann’s notion of a suffering God as mythological. See <i class="calibre5">Theo-Drama IV: The Action</i>, p. 333 and <i class="calibre5">Theo-Drama V: The Last Act</i>, pp. 231–33.</p>
<p class="ntull">22  Again it must be remembered that it was solely out of love for humankind that the Father sent his Son into the world (see Jn 3:16). The Father proved his love for us through the death of his Son (see Rom. 5:10; 1 Jn 4:10). In this the Father manifested the richness of his mercy (see Eph. 2:4). It is precisely the Father who ‘did not withhold his own Son, but gave him up for all of us’ (Rom. 8:32). The whole work of reconciliation was initiated and accomplished according to the loving will of the Father (see Eph. 1:3–14). ‘All of this is from God, who through Christ reconciled us to himself…. God was in Christ reconciling the world to himself’ (2 Cor. 5:18–19). The Father then is not concerned with mythologies about divine suffering, but with actual human history, for it is within the lives of historical human beings, including the historical human life of his own Son, that real suffering is endured. Denying that the Father suffered ensures that his love was not egotistically focused upon himself. Moreover, far from undermining the Father’s love, such a denial equally preserves and confirms that his love was thoroughly and solely focused upon human suffering – that of his Son and of humankind.</p>
<p class="ntull">23  One may be able to appeal to the parable of the Prodigal Son, but even here the father grieves solely over what his son has lost (see Lk 15:11–32). The father’s love is completely altruistic, and thus his grief is in no way selfishly focused upon himself and his suffering. Similarly, the Father may have grieved over the incarnate Son who assumed our prodigality, yet his concern bore no trace of self-interest. Likewise, it could be argued that, since to see the Son is to see the Father (see Jn 14:9), Jesus’ suffering reflects the suffering of the Father. Yet, what is reflected in Jesus is not so much the suffering as the love expressed within the suffering. To behold the suffering of Jesus is not to behold the suffering of the Father, but rather the immense love of the Father reflected in his suffering Son.</p>
<p class="ntull">24  The baptism initiated Jesus’ ministry as the Messiah. The Father’s proclamation at Jesus’ baptism comes from Psalm 2:7 (’You are my beloved son’) and from Isaiah 42:1 (’Behold my servant, in whom I well pleased’). The Father is pleased with his Son for he will be the suffering servant who, in filial obedience, will lay down his life. This is what it means for Jesus to be the Messiah.</p>
<p class="ntull">25  See pp. 165 and 167–68 above.</p>
<p class="ntull">26  Aquinas states that Christ, through his passion and death, merited his own resurrection and exultation. See <i class="calibre5">ST</i>, III, 49, 6. Moreover, ‘Christ by his passion merited salvation, not only for himself, but likewise for his members.’ <i class="calibre5">ST</i>, III, 48, 1.</p>
<p class="ntull">27  See M. Hooker, <i class="calibre5">Not Ashamed of the Gospel</i> (Carlisle: The Paternoster Press, 1994), pp. 7–19 on the scandalous nature of the cross within Roman culture and Old Testament thought, and how the New Testament writers coped with the scandal of Jesus’ crucifixion.</p>
<p class="ntull">28  The synoptic tradition is not as explicit in making a theological or salvific connection between Jesus’ death and resurrection. When asked for a sign to prove that he was the Messiah, Jesus responded that no sign would be given except the sign of Jonah. ‘For three days and three nights the Son of Man will be in the heart of the earth’ (Mt 12:40; see also 12:38–42, Lk 11:29–32). That Jesus is truly the anointed Savior of God would be seen in his death and resurrection. Peter proclaimed Jesus to be the Messiah, the Son of God, but it was Jesus who clarified its true meaning by stating on three occasions that he, therefore, must go to Jerusalem to suffer and die, and on the third day rise from the dead (see Mt 16:13–23, 17:22–23, 20:17–19 and parallels). Here there is an obvious connection between Jesus suffering and his rising, but the salvific significance remains implicit. The Transfiguration, which is closely associated with Jesus being the suffering Messiah, is seen, especially in Luke, as prefiguring the salvific ‘passing over’ or ‘exodus’ of Jesus from death to glory (see Lk 9:28–36). Luke also has Jesus speak of his coming death and resurrection as a baptism he must undergo, but again the salvific connection remains hidden (see Lk 12:49–50). Quoting Psalm 118:22–23, Jesus asserted that he is the stone rejected by the builders, but that God will nonetheless make him the cornerstone (see Mt 21:42 and parallels). The implication is that the crucifixion will be seen as the world’s rejection and the resurrection will be seen as God’s vindication. Because of his death and resurrection he will become the cornerstone of salvation (see Eph. 2:20, 1 Pet. 2:4–8). Within the Synoptics the most obvious connection between Jesus’ death and resurrection is the actual historical events themselves. Jesus dies and three days later he rises in glory, but the theological significance of the connection is, for the most part, not explicated. Only Luke tells of Jesus’ impatience at the disciples’ lack of faith in what the prophets had foretold. ‘Was it not necessary that the Messiah should suffer these things and then enter into his glory’ (Lk 24:25). Yes, but why? Only at the very end of the Gospel did Jesus say that he had fulfilled what was written in the Law, the prophets and the psalms. ‘Thus it is written, that the Messiah is to suffer and rise from the dead on the third day, and that repentance and forgiveness of sins is to be proclaimed in his name to the nations’ (Lk 24:46–47). Here we clearly see that the forgiveness of sins is predicated upon Jesus’ salvific suffering and his subsequent resurrection.</p>
<p class="ntull">29  It must be noted that while Paul states that at the resurrection we will possess a spiritual body (πνευματκόν), yet it is nonetheless a real body that we will possess (see 1 Cor. 15:42ff). The absence of a bodily resurrection has profound effects not only on how we view and conceive human life, but also on how we view and conceive the whole material order.</p>
<p class="ntull">30  Within the Gospel of John, since Christians already partake of the risen body and blood of Jesus, they are assured of being raised up on the last day. Just as Jesus lives because of the Father so Christians, who abide in him through the Eucharist, will live for ever (see Jn 6:53–59).</p>
<p class="ntull">31  Process theology makes much of God being a ‘fellow sufferer.’ The despair of such a notion is witnessed in the fact that, if process thought is correct, there is no personal immortality nor any notion of Jesus’ return in glory when all evil and suffering will be vanquished. Nonetheless, D. Griffin is rather nonchalant and indifferent to this issue. He holds that while ‘life beyond bodily death’ may give ‘one’s faith additional dimensions of both vitality and peace, and that this belief also generally deepens one’s sense of the importance of other human life and thereby one’s concern for others, including the concern for human justice,’ it is nonetheless ‘not central to the present process theodicy.’ <i class="calibre5">God, Power, and Evil</i>, pp. 312 and 311. In actual fact, the metaphysical principles contained within process thought do not hold out any hope for personal life after bodily death even for those who desire such. (Of course, any prospect of a bodily resurrection is absolutely impossible and the anticipation of such would be absurd.) Human beings, with their experiences, are but the ontological components out of which God constructs his everlasting existence. In response to this Goetz writes: ‘If the purpose of our life and death is finally that we contribute to “the self-creation of God,” how, an outraged critic of God might demand, does God’s love differ from the love of a famished diner for his meat course?’ ‘The Suffering God: The Rise of a New Orthodoxy,’ <i class="calibre5">The Christian Century</i> 103/13 (1986):388.</p>
<p class="ntnl">Nonetheless, Griffin holds that even if one did allow ‘a situation where our souls would no longer be influenced by our bodies, there would still be a multiplicity of influences upon each individual, and each individual would still have its capacity for self-determination, even <i class="calibre5">vis-à-vis</i> God. The same metaphysical principles which make evil possible now would still obtain then’ (p. 312). See also D. Griffin, ‘The Possibility of Subjective Immortality in Whitehead’s Philosophy,’ <i class="calibre5">The Modern Schoolman</i> 53 (1975):39–57.So, even if one allowed for ‘the hope’ of life after bodily death, it would hardly be heaven, but rather an everlasting hell. But it is to this hellish existence that process theology has condemned God, for he is forever doomed to participate in a metaphysical process that is ontologically enmeshed in evil with no hope of perfection. In process thought it is ultimately better to be human and die (cease to exist), than to be God and live for ever. See Goetz, ‘The Suffering God,’ pp. 388–89.</p>
<p class="ntull">32  I believe that much contemporary soteriology is gnostic precisely because it refuses to allow Jesus’ redemptive work to bring about ‘changes in kind,’ but only permits ‘changes in degree.’ See my ‘Gnosticism and Contemporary Soteriology: Some Reflections,’ <i class="calibre5">New Blackfriars</i> 76 (1995):546–54.</p>
</body>
</html>
