<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en-US">
  <head>
    <title>Does God Suffer?</title>
    <link href="../styles/page-template.xpgt" rel="stylesheet" type="application/vnd.adobe-page-template+xml"/>
    <meta content="urn:uuid:e0000000-0000-0000-0000-000004626051" name="Adept.expected.resource"/>
    <meta http-equiv="Content-Type" content="text/html; charset=utf-8"/>
  <link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="../../stylesheet.css"/>
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="../../page_styles.css"/>
</head>
  <body class="calibre">
<p class="cta"><a id="page_243" class="calibre2"></a><a href="06_Contents.xhtml#ch10" id="ch10" class="calibre2">10</a></p>
<p class="cs"><a href="06_Contents.xhtml#ch10" class="calibre2">Suffering in the Light of Christ</a></p>
<p class="pn">The mystery of Jesus, as the incarnate Son of God who died for our sins and rose that we might have eternal life, is the Father’s response to the mystery of human suffering. Therefore, the experience of suffering can only be fully understood and adequately interpreted in the light of Jesus.<sup class="calibre6">1</sup> As Pope John Paul II states:</p>
<p class="bq1">One can say that with the passion of Christ all human suffering has found itself in a new situation. And it is as though Job had foreseen this when he said: ‘I know that my Redeemer lives …,’ and as though he had directed towards it his own suffering, which without the Redemption could not have revealed to him the fullness of its meaning. In the cross of Christ not only is the Redemption accomplished through suffering, but also human suffering itself has been redeemed. Christ – without any fault of his own – took on himself ‘the total evil of sin’ …. The eloquence of the cross and death is, however, completed by the eloquence of the resurrection. Man finds in the resurrection a completely new light, which helps him to go forward through the thick darkness of humiliations, doubts, hopelessness and persecution.<sup class="calibre6">2</sup></p>
<p class="in">In the previous chapter we examined what the Son of God as man accomplished through his suffering and death on the cross. This redemptive suffering and death not only led to his own resurrection, but it also commenced the eschatological outpouring of the Holy Spirit with all of the effects that flow from it. Through faith and baptism Christians come to share a new life with the Father in Christ through the indwelling of the Holy Spirit. As Pope John Paul II stated above, it is in the light of this gospel of Jesus Christ that human suffering assumes a whole new meaning, and for Christians, through sharing in this gospel life, suffering is experienced and interpreted in an entirely new manner. In this chapter I wish to examine the meaning of all human suffering in the light of the <a id="page_244" class="calibre3"></a>gospel, and more specifically the Christian experience and interpretation of human suffering from within the context of sharing in Jesus’ death and resurrection.</p>
<p class="in">It must be remembered that those who espouse a passible and so suffering God have done so in order to give meaning and significance to human suffering. However, as I have extensively argued throughout this study, in making God a passible suffering God, they have not only undermined a true understanding of God, but they have also, in the end, distorted the Christian gospel. In so doing, I believe, they have equally disfigured the Christian experience, interpretation and meaning of human suffering. This chapter wishes to provide a framework for a Christian understanding of human suffering. Thus, while the issue of God’s impassibility may seem to have faded into the shadows, this chapter is actually the culmination and completion of all that has gone before.<sup class="calibre6">3</sup></p>
<p class="in">This will be a rather lengthy chapter. The reason for this is twofold. First, I want to address, as far as possible, the various particular causes of suffering and, in the light of these multiple causes, evaluate the distinct Christian interpretations of and responses to the suffering that these causes have occasioned. Second, because I want to address the actual lived experiences of people, I will try to make this chapter as practical and concrete as possible.<sup class="calibre6">4</sup></p>
<p class="sec"><b class="calibre8">Suffering and the Body of Christ</b></p>
<p class="pn">The keystone of this chapter is the ecclesial reality of the body of Christ. We saw in the last chapter that all those who come to believe in Jesus as their Lord and Savior and are baptized come to live in Christ. ‘For as many of you as were baptized into Christ have put on Christ. There is neither Jew nor Greek … for you are all one in Christ Jesus’ (Gal. 3:27–28). Christians constitute one living body (see Rom. 12:4–5; 1 Cor. 6:15; Eph. 3:6; Col. 3:15) with him as the head (see Eph. 1:22–23). The great mystery revealed by the Father is that all would be united in Christ (see Eph. 1:10). ‘He is the head of the body, the church’ (Col. 1:18). This incorporation into Christ’s body is the work of the Holy Spirit, who is its principle of life (see Eph. 4:4).</p>
<p class="bq1">For just as the body is one and has many members, and all the members of the body, though many, are one body, so it is with Christ. For in the one Spirit we were all baptized into one body – <a id="page_245" class="calibre3"></a>Jews or Greeks, slaves or free – and we were all made to drink of the one Spirit (1 Cor. 12:12–13).</p>
<p class="in">Christ and the members of his body actually form one new man (Eph. 2:15–16). As the one new man in Christ Christians live within and so share the very life of the Trinity.</p>
<p class="in">Because a proper understanding of the body of Christ is central to our present discussion, we must clearly discern the similarities and the differences between the human body and the body of Christ. First, this Pauline conception of the body of Christ is more than a mere metaphor in that the body of Christ is not merely a moral body or association, but is an actual and true living reality just as the human body is one living reality. There is a genuine correspondence between the relationship of Christ and Christians and the relationship of the members or parts of the living human body. Second, this correspondence lies precisely in that both share, in a similar fashion, one common life by which they are one living reality. The human body is one for all the members or parts of the body are constituted as one living reality or being through the soul. Similarly, the body of Christ is one living reality, and it is the Holy Spirit who forms it into one living reality. As the human soul gives life and so unites the members of a human body, so it is the Spirit that causes Christ and his members to be one living body. Third, the important difference between the body of Christ and the human body is that the body of Christ is composed of distinct persons while the members of the human body form one person. While the Holy Spirit establishes that Christ and the members of his body are one, this living unity does not diminish or undermine the distinct individuality of its members, rather the personal integrity of each Christian member is enhanced.<sup class="calibre6">5</sup></p>
<p class="in"><a id="page_246" class="calibre3"></a>I want to contend that this ecclesial reality – the body of Christ – is the pre-eminent locus from which to understand fully and in which to interpret properly all human suffering, both the suffering of Christians and non-Christians alike. This one ecclesial reality of the body of Christ is now the new existential context either in which or around which all sin and evil is enacted and all human suffering is experienced. Everything that now occurs within time and human history, including every sin and evil, and every form of suffering that accrues to every sin and evil, is subsumed, in some manner, within the one reality of Christ and his body. Thus all evil and the suffering due to it must be interpreted from within this ecclesial context. From within this context I want initially to discuss two essential truths that pertain to human suffering as a whole or in general. I will then proceed to discuss the various causes of suffering with their related interpretations and responses.</p>
<p class="sec"><b class="calibre8">Human Suffering: Sharing in the Resurrection of Christ</b></p>
<p class="pn">The first essential truth is that Christians, as members of Christ’s body, are united to <i class="calibre5">the risen Christ</i> as to their head. Being incorporated into the body of Christ, Christians become a new creation in Christ, sharing in the resurrected life of his Spirit (see 2 Cor. 5:17). Moreover, as I will argue shortly, all of humankind, through his body the church, is adjoined to <i class="calibre5">the risen Christ</i>. Thus all human suffering must be interpreted from within the context that all who suffer are united, to a greater or lesser extent, to <i class="calibre5">the risen Christ</i>. For the sake of clarity and order, I will first examine the suffering of Christians, and then the suffering of those who are not.</p>
<p class="in">In the Gospel of John Jesus exhorted his disciples to be at peace. ‘In the world you have tribulation; but be of good cheer, I have overcome the world’ (Jn 16:33). Their hearts should not be troubled because there are many rooms in his Father’s house, and he is going to prepare a place for them. ‘I will come again and will take you to myself that where I am you may be also’ (Jn 14:1–3). In the midst of tribulation and suffering, Christians cannot only be untroubled, but they can even be cheerful because of the hope of the resurrection held out to them through the victory of Jesus.</p>
<p class="in">Christians can possess such an attitude in the midst of their present suffering because, as members of Christ’s body, they are already united <a id="page_247" class="calibre3"></a>to their risen Lord, and therefore, already share in his victory. God the Father ‘made us alive together with Christ (by grace you have been saved), and raised us up with him, and made us sit with him in the heavenly places in Christ Jesus’ (Eph. 2:5–6). Christians are presently ‘alive together with’ Christ (Col. 2:13). It must be remembered that Jesus is risen as a glorious man, and Christian men and women, as members of his body through the Holy Spirit, live in him, and so they are already in communion with and share in his risen humanity.<sup class="calibre6">6</sup> Because Christian men and women are united to the risen man Jesus, their physical and emotional sufferings are experienced from within his resurrected humanity. In this life Christians presently suffer and die in Christ, and so they suffer and die as partakers of his resurrection. Christians, as members of his body, belong to the risen Lord (see Rom. 14:8), and thus, the grandeur of God’s great mystery is ‘Christ in you, the hope of glory’ (Col. 1:27).</p>
<p class="in">Because Christians already share in Christ’s resurrection as living members of his body, they are enjoined to set their minds not on the tribulations of this present world, but on the realities of their future glory. ‘For you have died, and your life is hid with Christ in God. When Christ who is our life appears, then you also will appear with him in glory’ (Col. 3:1–4). Having shared in Christ’s death through baptism, ‘we shall certainly be united with him in a resurrection like his’ (Rom. 6:5). Because Christians are children of the Father, they are fellow heirs with Christ, provided they willingly suffer with him in order that they ‘may also be glorified with him’ (Rom. 8:17). Christians have conquered death and all of the evils that it embodies, for ‘thanks be to God, who gives us the victory through our Lord Jesus Christ’ (1 Cor. 15:57). Paul could declare that ‘I consider that the sufferings of this present time are not worth comparing with the glory that is to be revealed to us’ (Rom. 8:18). Therefore, Christians not only rejoice in their ‘hope of sharing the glory of God,’ but as Paul further stated:</p>
<p class="bq1">More than that, we rejoice in our sufferings, knowing that suffering produces endurance, and endurance produces character, and character produces hope, and hope does not disappoint us, because God’s love has been poured into our hearts through the Holy Spirit which has been given to us. Rom. 5:2–5.</p>
<p class="in">No evil – tribulation, distress, persecution, famine, nakedness, peril, or the sword – can separate Christians from the love of God in Christ. ‘No, in all these things we are more than conquerors through him who loved us’ (Rom. 8:35–39). Just as Christians, in their suffering, have borne the image of the man of dust, so shall they ‘bear the image of the man of heaven’ (1 Cor. 15:49). Christians are not to lose heart.</p>
<p class="bq1">Though our outer nature is wasting away, our inner nature is being renewed every day. For this slight momentary affliction is preparing <a id="page_248" class="calibre3"></a>for us an eternal weight of glory beyond all comparison, because we look not to the things that are seen but to the things that are unseen; for the things that are seen are transient, but the things that are unseen are eternal. 2 Cor. 4:16–18.</p>
<p class="in">For the sake of Christ Paul willingly suffered the loss of everything. He depended entirely on the righteousness of God that he might know the power of Christ’s resurrection, and ‘may share his suffering becoming like him in his death, that if possible I may attain the resurrection from the dead’ (Phil. 3:8–11).</p>
<p class="in">James exhorts his readers: ‘Blessed is the man who endures trial, for when he has stood the test he will receive the crown of life which God has promised to those who love him’ (James 1:12). The First Letter of Peter similarly states:</p>
<p class="bq1">Beloved, do not be surprised at the fiery ordeal which comes upon you to prove you, as though something strange were happening to you. But rejoice in so far as you share Christ’s suffering, that you may also rejoice and be glad when his glory is revealed. 1 Pet. 4:12–13.</p>
<p class="in">The final scene of heavenly glory is depicted in the Book of Revelation:</p>
<p class="bq1">Behold, the dwelling of God is with men. He will dwell with them, and they shall be his people, and God himself will be with them, he will wipe away every tear from their eyes, and death shall be no more, neither shall there be mourning nor crying nor pain any more, for the former things have passed away…. Behold, I make all things new. Rev. 21:3–5.</p>
<p class="in">Thus, being members of his body, and so living in communion with the risen Christ, is the supreme consolation experienced by Christians in the midst of their suffering and death. There is none greater, and its importance cannot be overestimated. Paul reminded the Corinthians that ‘as we share abundantly in Christ’s suffering, so through Christ we share abundantly in comfort too’ (2 Cor. 1:5). As the above demonstrates this consolation is multifaceted.</p>
<p class="in">First, Christians are confident in faith that, in Christ, they have been freed from the final and greatest evil with its everlasting and unimaginable suffering – the damnation of hell – for there is ‘no condemnation for those who are in Christ Jesus’ (Rom. 8:1). This is a source of great hope and consolation for Christians, one that should not be ignored or ridiculed.<sup class="calibre6">7</sup></p>
<p class="in">Second, Christians know that whatever evil befalls them or whatever suffering they endure they are inseparably united, in the here and now, to Jesus their risen Lord. Being united to their risen Lord, Christians can experience, through the Holy Spirit, the love, consolation, mercy, and <a id="page_249" class="calibre3"></a>compassion of their heavenly Father (see Rom. 5:5). To abide within the body of Christ is to abide within the very life of the Trinity, and thus to experience and know, even in the midst of suffering, this abounding and consummate communion of love and life.</p>
<p class="in">Third, being so presently united to Christ, Christians have the guarantee and the assurance that the fulness of joy and the blessedness of eternal life will ultimately be theirs no matter what their present circumstances may be.</p>
<p class="in">The above is equally the consolation that Christ, through his church, offers to all of God’s people. The church, as Christ’s body, is commissioned to proclaim to all peoples the good news of redemption in Christ Jesus (see Mt 28:18–20). The good news is that, in the midst of the world’s horrendous evil and suffering, all men and women, of every nation and race, can come to experience and know the consolation and the hope of the risen Jesus in this life, and come to obtain the full reality of his resurrected glory in heaven. Christians offer not their own but the Father’s definitive answer to a suffering and sin-bound world. The consolation and hope experienced by Christians, as members of Christ’s body, should compel them, in love and compassion, to bear witness both to Jesus’ victory over sin and condemnation and so over all suffering, and to the new freedom and life of the Holy Spirit. In the face of the world’s suffering, to deprive humankind of the gospel is to deprive men and women of hope, and so enslave them in despair. In the midst of their own suffering Christians are exhorted to ‘always be prepared to make a defence to any one who calls you to account for the hope that is in you, yet do it with gentleness and reverence’ (1 Pet. 3:15).<sup class="calibre6">8</sup></p>
<p class="in">While love demands, in the face of sin and death, that the church’s first and highest priority is to proclaim the gospel so as to bring others into full communion within the body of Christ, it is not the church’s sole obligation. <a id="page_250" class="calibre3"></a>It must not be forgotten that through the Incarnation, the Son of God, as the Second Vatican Council stated, ‘has in a certain way united himself with each man.’<sup class="calibre6">9</sup> Therefore, the risen Christ, who suffered and died for all, now reaches out to all that suffer. But it is not Christ, as if in isolation from his body, who compassionately embraces all who suffer, but he does so only in union with his body the church.</p>
<p class="in">Through the outpouring of the Holy Spirit Christ established his body, the church, ‘as the universal sacrament of salvation.’<sup class="calibre6">10</sup> As the universal sacrament, the church is ‘sign and instrument, that is, of communion with God and of unity among all men.’”<sup class="calibre6">11</sup> The church makes Christ’s salvific work present to the whole world, and in so doing joins all men and women to Christ.</p>
<p class="bq1">All men are called to this catholic unity which prefigures and promotes universal peace. And in different ways to it belong, or are related: the Catholic faithful, others who believe in Christ, and finally all mankind, called by God’s grace to salvation.<sup class="calibre6">12</sup></p>
<p class="in">Because the church, as the universal sacrament of salvation, is so united to all, Pope John Paul II has resolved that the church must embrace ‘the hopes and sufferings’ of all. ‘Indeed, precisely because Christ united himself with her in his mystery of Redemption, the Church must be strongly united with each man.’<sup class="calibre6">13</sup> The church unites itself to all men and women who suffer in at least two ways.</p>
<p class="in">First, the efficacy of the church’s prayer must be noted. In union with Christ its head, the church continually and steadfastly intercedes for all of God’s people – Christian and non-Christian alike. Because Christ now acts in union with his body, the prayer of the church, including that of the church of glory (Mary and the communion of saints), is the spring from which Christ’s grace and consolation flows to all who suffer. Through its prayer, whether in and through its eucharistic liturgy or in and through the personal prayer of individual Christians, the church gathers all human beings who suffer evil and injustice close to Christ who suffered and died for all.<sup class="calibre6">14</sup> Through its prayer Christ’s body embraces all of humankind, and so allows all men and women, even if <a id="page_251" class="calibre3"></a>they are not consciously aware of its source, to share in, to some degree, the grace and the consolation of Jesus and the hope that only the Spirit of life can give.</p>
<p class="in">Second, the church, through its various associations – parishes, local churches, religious orders, national and international charitable and social institutions, etc., as well as through the good works of its individual members, reaches out to those who suffer. Other secular social and charitable institutions as well as men and women of good will may equally care for those who suffer from poverty, famine, natural disasters, and war. However, Christians, while performing similar work, do so knowing that Christ, through his Incarnation, has united himself to all of God’s people and so they too, as members of his body, are united to all.<sup class="calibre6">15</sup></p>
<p class="in">Thus Christians, through their charitable work, embrace those who suffer not solely from a humanitarian viewpoint, but from within the truth that all men and women are their brothers and sisters in Christ. Jesus distinctly told his disciples that when they feed the hungry, give drink to the thirsty, welcome the stranger, clothe the naked, visit the imprisoned, they do so to him. So much is this the case that they will be judged on the fulfilment of this truth (see Mt 25:31–46). In actual fact Christians, as followers of Christ, must be known by their love for others, and so in loving others manifest and make present the love of Jesus (see Jn 13:35).<sup class="calibre6">16</sup></p>
<p class="in">In their efforts, then, to alleviate the evils of social, economic and political injustice, or in their fight to protect the rights of the unborn, the mentally impaired and the terminally ill, or in their care for the poor, the sick, and the dying, Christians bear witness and make real the love and consolation of Jesus. In so doing they make Jesus himself present. The charitable work of Christians gathers all men and women within the domain of Jesus and his church. In this way those who suffer are not only physically, materially and emotionally sustained in the midst of their suffering, but they equally come to share in a hope and reality that transcends their present condition. They come to experience the love of the Father who cares for the weak and oppressed, and who desires that they share in his eternal glory through Christ his Son. The good deeds of Christians also bear witness that evil, with all its suffering, will ultimately not have the final word. Through their acts of charity, Christians make present, even to those who do not believe, the hope and assurance that good will ultimately triumph over evil, an assurance founded upon <a id="page_252" class="calibre3"></a>the mystery of Christ’s death and resurrection. This hope, and so the consolation of such hope, thus penetrates the hearts of those who suffer.<sup class="calibre6">17</sup></p>
<p class="sec"><b class="calibre8">The Risen Christ: Sharing in Human Suffering</b></p>
<p class="pn">In the above discussion I have argued that Christians, as members of Christ’s body, share in his resurrected life, and so the suffering that they presently endure is experienced in communion with the victorious risen Jesus. As I will discuss later, there is a difference between the suffering caused by one’s own personal sin and the suffering due to one’s faithfulness to the gospel, yet both forms of suffering are experienced in communion with the resurrected Jesus. I have also discussed how those who are not Christians, through evangelization, and through the prayer and the charitable work of Christians, also participate in the consolation and the hope that comes from the risen Christ. I want now to discuss the second general truth concerning human suffering within the context of the body of Christ. It is complementary or reciprocal to the above first truth.</p>
<p class="in">If, by becoming members of Christ’s body, Christians come to live, in the midst of their suffering, in communion with the risen Christ, equally the risen Christ, as the head of his body, comes to share in their sufferings, regardless of whether their suffering is due to their own personal sin or to their faithfulness to the gospel. While Jesus is gloriously risen, and thus beyond sin and death and so evil, yet as head of his body, which is still suffering under the constraints of sin, evil, and death, he too, as the head, is still, in some real sense, suffering.<sup class="calibre6">18</sup> As head of his body he cannot be immune from the lived experiences of his body, whether they be good or evil, for both head and members embody one life through the <a id="page_253" class="calibre3"></a>Holy Spirit. Moreover, if the body of Christ reaches out and embraces all who suffer so as to gather them within the consolation that comes from the risen Christ, so the risen Christ, in union with his body who embraces all peoples, comes to share in their suffering as well. Pope John Paul II has stated that Christ ‘himself in his redemptive suffering has become, in a certain sense, a sharer in all human suffering.’<sup class="calibre6">19</sup> Thus the consolation of all who suffer, Christians and non-Christians alike, resides not only in their sharing in Christ’s risen life, but also in his sharing in their present tribulation. There is scriptural warrant for maintaining such a position, and it is this truth that I now wish to develop.</p>
<p class="in">When Jesus, in the glorious light and splendor of his risen state, appeared to Paul on the road to Damascus, he did not tell Paul that he was persecuting ‘his followers’ or ‘his disciples’ or even ‘his body.’ Rather, Jesus was emphatic: ‘Saul, Saul, why do you persecute me?’ When Paul asked who he was, seemingly in defense since he thought he was only persecuting earthly Christians and not some heavenly being, Jesus answered: ‘I am Jesus, whom you are persecuting’ (Acts 9:4–5). I believe that it is from this conversion experience that Paul first perceived and later developed his understanding of the body of Christ, but, more importantly for our present purposes, Paul realized that in persecuting Christians, and so making them suffer, he was actually persecuting Jesus and so making him suffer. As Paul would later declare: ‘If one member suffers, all suffer together’ (1 Cor. 12:26). It is not just Christians who suffer together as Christ’s body. As its head Jesus too is a member of his body, and so is not exempt from the sufferings of his body, whether these be through persecution, the sins of its members, or any other evil.<sup class="calibre6">20</sup></p>
<p class="in">It is in the light of this truth that we must interpret, I believe, those passages within the New Testament which speak of Christians sharing in the sufferings of Christ. For example, in a passages already quoted, Paul told the Corinthians: ‘For as we share abundantly in Christ’s sufferings (ὅτι καθὼς περισσεύει τὰ παθήματα του̑ Xριστου̑ εἰς ἡμα̑ς), so thorough Christ we share abundantly in comfort too’ (2 Cor. 1:5). Equally, Paul spoke of his desire ‘to share his [Christ’s] sufferings (κοινωνίαν παθημάτων αὐτού), becoming like him in his death’ so that he might also share in his resurrection (Phil. 3:10). Paul also assured the Romans that they are heirs of Christ, ‘provided we suffer with him (συμπάσχομεν) in order that we may also be glorified with him’ (Rom. 8:17). Moreover, the First Letter of Peter exhorts its readers: ‘Rejoice in so far as you share Christ’s sufferings (Kαθò κοινωνείτε τοις τού Xριστού παθήμασιν χαίρετε), that you may also rejoice and be glad when his glory is revealed’ (1 Pet. 4:12). The author stated that he is himself ‘a witness of the sufferings of Christ <a id="page_254" class="calibre3"></a>(μάρτυς των τού Xριστού παθημάτων) as well as a partaker in the glory that is to be revealed’ (1 Pet. 5:1).<sup class="calibre6">21</sup></p>
<p class="in">The experience of suffering articulated in these passages is multifaceted. To grasp their full significance each facet of the experience must be clearly perceived as well as the total unity of the experience. First, it is obviously Christians who are presently suffering – Paul, the Corinthians, the Romans, the readers of First Peter and the author himself. It is the present suffering of Christians that is the cause for comment.</p>
<p class="in">Second, it is the present suffering of Christians that constitutes, as the Greek present tense attests, the present suffering of Christ. The passages are not referring merely to the past suffering of Christ, although this is implied. Nor are Christians merely imitating the past suffering of Christ by way of following his example. Rather, Christians, in their present suffering, are sharing in the present suffering of Christ.<sup class="calibre6">22</sup></p>
<p class="in">Third, as the last point intimates, what is most striking about these passages is that the suffering of Christians is primarily predicated not of themselves but of Christ. It is not simply that Christ is united to their suffering, but that they, in their suffering, are united to his suffering. These passages, then, are in conformity with and testify to the truth of Paul’s conversion experience. It is primarily Christ who continues to suffer in communion with his body.</p>
<p class="in">This may at first appear an odd turn about, but it actually expresses the great mystery of Christ and his body. It is Christ who is the head of his body, and therefore, what accrues to his body primarily accrues to him as its head. Christ is the primary subject of all the acts and the experiences of Christians, that is, those who are members of his body (see Phil. 1:21). Thus, as members of his body, the suffering of Christians is predicated not of the body itself, that is, of themselves, but of him who is the head of the body – Christ himself – for as the head of his body Christ has made the suffering of his body truly his own. As its Savior, Christ first suffered on behalf of his body, and now, as its Lord and head, he continues to suffer in union with it.<sup class="calibre6">23</sup></p>
<p class="in">While we will have reason to discuss the following passage again later, it is here that the meaning of Colossians 1:24 might be properly interpreted. Paul (or another author) wrote: ‘Now I rejoice in my sufferings for your sake, and in my flesh I complete what is lacking in Christ’s afflictions (άνταναπληρω̑ τὰ ύστερήματα τω̑ν θλίΨεων του̑ Xρίστου̑ έν τη̑ <a id="page_255" class="calibre3"></a>σαρκί μου) for the sake of his body, that is the church.’ Yes, Christ has completed the work of salvation through his suffering on the cross. There is nothing more for him to do in order to conquer sin and death. Therefore, Paul’s suffering should not be interpreted as if he, in his suffering, was accomplishing something that Christ left incomplete. Rather, Paul realized that his own sufferings in the flesh are the afflictions of Christ who is the head of the body, and thus his sufferings were the completion of or the filling up of Christ’s present suffering. It is the present afflictions of Christ and not the past sufferings that Paul was completing. Paul was suffering, in union with Christ the head, on behalf of the body, the church. Paul’s present suffering was truly Christ’s present affliction, and its purpose was the same as that of Christ’s, that is, for the up-building and growth of the body so that it might reach full maturity with Christ its head.<sup class="calibre6">24</sup> That is why Paul could rejoice in his sufferings. He knew that they were contributing to the growth of Christ’s body, the church.<sup class="calibre6">25</sup></p>
<p class="in"><a id="page_256" class="calibre3"></a>Fourth, in being united to the sufferings of Christ their head, Christians are not just imitating the past suffering of their Savior, they are presently being conformed into, by sharing in, his crucified likeness. In their suffering Christians bear the marks of Jesus in their own flesh (see Gal. 6:17). As Paul stated: ‘1 have been crucified with Christ; it is no longer 1 who live, but Christ who lives in me; and the life 1 now live in the flesh 1 live by faith in the Son of God, who loved me and gave himself for me’ (Gal. 2:20).</p>
<p class="in">Fifth, by being conformed, through their suffering, into the likeness of their crucified Savior, Christians are comforted in knowing that they are presently, as the above passages attest, equally sharing in Christ’s resurrection, and so being conformed into the likeness of their glorified head. It must be remembered that it is the risen and victorious Christ who is suffering, and so it is the Christ who has already conquered sin, death and all evil. Thus Christians who share in Christ’s present suffering, as members of his body, do so as sharers in Christ’s victory. Christians, through their present suffering, are sharing Christ’s present suffering so that, in being conformed into the likeness of his death, they might, in the future, come to share fully in the likeness of his present risen glory (see Rom. 6:5).</p>
<p class="in">These truths, 1 believe, are again a source of great comfort to Christians in the midst of their suffering. They know, in faith, that the suffering they experience is not merely experienced by Christ their head, but more deeply that the suffering they experience is primarily the suffering of Christ their head. They are simply, yet significantly and profoundly, suffering in communion with him for the sake of their brothers and sisters and for the salvation of the world. But they equally know, in faith, that Christ their head is not only their suffering head but also their risen head, and thus they are assured that he and they, in communion with him, have conquered all suffering. Their suffering, as was Christ’s, is their path to eternal glory.<sup class="calibre6">26</sup></p>
<p class="in"><a id="page_257" class="calibre3"></a>To re-enforce our scriptural examination of Christ’s present suffering, it is also worth noting the Christian tradition on this crucial point. H. de Lubac provides patristic and medieval selections which speak of Christ continuing to suffer with his body. Origen, for example, commenting on Jesus’ words ‘I tell you, I will never again drink of this fruit of the vine until that day when I drink it new with you in my Father’s kingdom’ (Mt 26:29), argued that, since this is held out to the apostles as a future joy and one that he himself will not enjoy until they enter the Father’s kingdom, he himself continues to grieve and suffer until all are united with him in the heavenly kingdom.</p>
<p class="bq1">It is inconceivable that Paul should grieve over sinners and weep over those who fall away, while my own Lord Jesus should be dry-eyed as he approaches his Father, when he stands by the altar and offers propitiation for us. ‘He who approaches the altar does not drink the wine of gladness,’ that is to say he still tastes the bitterness of our sins. He has no heart to drink that wine alone in the Kingdom of God – he is waiting for us; for did he not say, ‘until I drink with you’? It is we then who by the negligence of our lives delay his happiness.</p>
<p class="bq1">Surely, too, if you who are a member have not perfect joy as long as a member is missing, how much more will he, our Lord and Savior, consider his joy incomplete while any member of his body is missing …. He is loath to receive his perfect happiness without you, that is, without his people who constitute his body and his members.<sup class="calibre6">27</sup></p>
<p class="in">Julian of Norwich can speak of the continual thirst of Christ until the end of time.</p>
<p class="bq1">For this is the ghostly thirst of Christ: the love-longing that lasteth and ever shall, till we see that sight [the oneing of all mankind that shall be saved unto the Blessed Trinity] at Doomsday. For we shall be saved and shall be Christ’s joy and his bliss, some be yet here and some be to come, and so shall some be, unto that day. Therefore this is his thirst and love-longing, to have us all together whole in him, to his bliss …. Anent that Christ is our Head, he is glorified and impassible; and anent his Body in which all his members be knit, he is not yet fully glorified, nor all impassible. Therefore the same desire and thirst that he had upon the Cross (which desire, longing and thirst, as to my sight, was in him from without beginning) the same hath he yet, and shall, unto the time that the last soul that shall be saved is come up to his bliss …. The ghostly thirst is lasting in him as long as we be in need, drawing us up to his bliss.<sup class="calibre6">28</sup></p>
<p class="in">Adelman of Brescia, commenting on Colossians 1:24 where the author speaks of completing what is lacking in the sufferings of Christ, states that Paul equates his own sufferings with those of Christ’s present sufferings. ‘Therefore Christ suffered in Paul and was crucified in Peter, both <a id="page_258" class="calibre3"></a>Peter and Paul being in Christ citizens of heaven.’ Even though Paul, in one sense was already with Christ in heaven, yet, since Paul was ‘still being buffeted on earth by an angel of Satan’ so too was Christ. The reason being that when one member of the body suffers so too do all members suffer including Christ. This suffering will not come to an end until ‘the whole Body will be clothed with the glorious state of immortality, and all the members will be conformed to the Head.’<sup class="calibre6">29</sup></p>
<p class="in">Augustine also clearly stated that Christ suffers with his earthly body.</p>
<p class="bq1">Since we now identify head and body (him as head, us as body), when we hear his voice we must hear it as coming from both head and body. For whatever he has suffered we too have suffered with him, and what we suffer he too suffers with us. If the head suffers in any way, how can the hand assert that it does not suffer? If the hand suffers, how can the head say that it does not suffer? If the foot feels something, how can the head say that it does not feel it too? When one part of our body is in any pain, all the rest rush together to help the suffering member.</p>
<p class="bq1">It follows then that if he has suffered and we have suffered with him, and he is now ascended into heaven and is seated at the right hand of the Father, whatever his Church suffers by way of this life’s tribulations, temptations, constrictions and deprivations (for she must be schooled to be purified like gold in the fire), this he also suffers.<sup class="calibre6">30</sup></p>
<p class="in">In the above I have emphasized that it is Christians who share in the sufferings of Christ, and so share in his consolations. Those who are not Christians do not know and cannot fully experience the consolation of sharing in the sufferings of Christ so as to encounter the hope of his risen glory. Again, this urgently bids Christians to proclaim, in love, the good news. Nonetheless, as we discussed above, the church, as the universal sacrament of salvation, reaches out to all that suffer so as to embrace them within the consolation of the risen Christ, so the church equally, embraces their sufferings so as to subsume them within the sufferings of Christ. Pope John Paul II states that through his body ‘Christ wishes to be united with every individual, and in a special way he is united with those who suffer.’<sup class="calibre6">31</sup></p>
<p class="in">Again, through its prayer, liturgical and personal, and through its charitable deeds the church lovingly unites all who suffer to the suffering Christ. Through the church, the body of Christ, Christ himself embraces the suffering of all who suffer through sin, sickness, natural disasters, poverty, injustice, prejudice, war, and death, and he makes their suffering his own. Non-Christians may not be aware that Christ is suffering in union with them and that they are suffering in union with him, but whatever consolation they experience in the midst of their suffering is ultimately due to their being embraced, through his body, by him.</p>
<p class="in"><a id="page_259" class="calibre3"></a>Moreover, Pope John Paul II advances this line of argument one significant step further. He states that not only are suffering non-Christians united to Christ, but their suffering is equally able to contribute to the world’s redemption. ‘[I]n the mystery of the Church as his Body, Christ has in a sense opened his own redemptive suffering to all human suffering. Insofar as man becomes a sharer in Christ’s sufferings – in any part of the world and at any time in history – to that extent <i class="calibre5">he in his own way completes</i> the suffering through which Christ accomplished the Redemption of the world.’<sup class="calibre6">32</sup></p>
<p class="sec"><b class="calibre8">The Eucharist: Suffering in the Risen Christ</b></p>
<p class="pn">The place where the ecclesial reality of the body of Christ is most fully enacted, and so where it is most fully experienced, is within the eucharistic liturgy. It is ‘the source and summit of the Christian life.’<sup class="calibre6">33</sup> Within the eucharistic liturgy, Christ, the risen head, unites himself most fully with his body here on earth in anticipation of the heavenly consummation. Thus, it is here in the eucharistic liturgy that all that we have discussed above finds its foremost expression<sup class="calibre6">34</sup></p>
<p class="in">First, within the eucharistic liturgy Christians do not simply remember and recall the past event of Christ’s sacrificial offering of himself to the Father, rather they are actually united to it. Christ, within the very action of the liturgy itself, unites his body to his once for all sacrifice.<sup class="calibre6">35</sup> Thus, Christians participate in and so reap the benefits of Christ’s sacrificial death. From within the eucharistic action itself, they experience and know Christ’s victory over sin – the root of all evil and suffering.</p>
<p class="in">Second, in being united to the one sacrifice of Christ, Christians place their own present suffering, whatever its cause, upon Christ’s cross, and Christ accepts it. Thus Christians not only know that, in Christ, their suffering is redeemed and conquered, but equally that Christ has assumed their present suffering to himself. It is within the eucharistic liturgy that the present suffering of Christians becomes most fully the present suffering of Christ.</p>
<p class="in">Third, not only does Christ take to himself the present suffering of Christians, but they, in turn, participate in his suffering as their head. Christians, in communion with Christ their head, unite themselves to the sufferings of all their brothers and sisters, Christians and non-Christians alike, and in union with Christ their head make intercession for them. It is within the liturgy that Christ, in union with his body, embraces the suffering of all, and thus it is within the liturgy that Christians most fully share in the sufferings of Christ. Within the eucharistic liturgy Christians participate in the suffering of Christ, and so complete what is still lacking for the sake of his whole body and for the salvation of the world.</p>
<p class="in"><a id="page_260" class="calibre3"></a>Fourth, it is in partaking of the risen and glorious body and blood of Jesus, the body that was once crucified and the blood that was once shed, that Christians commune most fully with their risen Lord. In partaking of the risen humanity of Jesus, the eating of his risen body and the drinking of his risen blood, Christians become most fully one with one another and with Christ their head. In the eucharistic communion Christ’s body becomes fully what it is.<sup class="calibre6">36</sup> ‘The cup of blessing which we bless, is it not participation in the blood of Christ? The bread which we break, is it not a participation in the body of Christ? Because there is one bread, we who are many are one body, for we all partake of one loaf’ (1 Cor. 10:16–17). Here, in the eucharistic communion, Christ embraces most fully the sufferings of his body and equally shares with his body the risen life of his Spirit. Moreover, Christians, especially those who together have partaken of Christ’s body and blood within the present liturgy, are united to one another as brothers and sisters in Christ. Together they too share in each other’s suffering and make common intercession for one another in union with Christ. Equally, together as Christ’s body, they experience the consolation of knowing that nothing can separate them from their risen Lord, and so nothing can separate them from his victory.<sup class="calibre6">37</sup> They expectantly look to his coming in glory and to their own participation in the fulness of eternal life. In faith, Christians lay hold of the truth of Jesus’ words.</p>
<p class="bq1">He who eats my flesh and drinks my blood has eternal life, and I will raise him up at the last day. For my flesh is food indeed, and my blood is drink indeed. He who eats my flesh and drinks my blood abides in me, and I in him. As the living Father sent me, and I live because of the Father, so he who eats me will live because of me. Jn 6: 54–57.</p>
<p class="in">Likewise, as Christians make intercession for the whole world, Christ, in communion with his body, joins all suffering people to the Father of mercy and the God of all consolations<sup class="calibre6">38</sup></p>
<p class="sec"><a id="page_261" class="calibre2"></a><b class="calibre8">A Radical Departure</b></p>
<p class="pn">In the above presentation, by locating human suffering within the ecclesial reality of the body of Christ, I have radically departed from those who espouse a passible and so suffering God. Many, if not most, of these theologians interpret the meaning and experience of suffering primarily and solely in the light of the suffering of God as God. In so doing they have, in their turn, radically departed from the Christian experience and understanding of human suffering.<sup class="calibre6">39</sup></p>
<p class="in">First, many have ultimately divorced suffering from the historical reality of Jesus’ redemptive suffering. Jesus’ redemptive death and resurrection do not place human suffering within an entirely new context, that is, within the salvific and ecclesial reality of Christ’s body. Jesus’ death becomes merely the revelatory sign or clue that God is always, a historically, suffering as God.</p>
<p class="in">Second, Jesus’ death and resurrection do not radically alter the context within which suffering is experienced, that is, within the context of being a member of Christ’s body. Thus, those who espouse a suffering God presume, as noted above, that everyone, regardless of whether or not one is a Christian, experiences equally whatever consolation can be obtained from a suffering God. The full riches of the Father’s mercy and compassion are no longer found in Jesus, his Son, and his mercy and compassion are no longer experienced from within his Son’s church. Nor, then, is the Father’s compassion and consolation mediated to all, even to those who are not Christians, through Christ and his church.</p>
<p class="in">Third, therefore, those who espouse solely a suffering God can hardly avoid divorcing the sufferer from the present historical communal and ecclesial dimension of Christ’s living body, the church. Instead they isolate the sufferer in his or her suffering. This is humanly and emotionally devastating. The sufferer stands alone in his or her suffering before a suffering God, who is himself a helpless and impotent victim. No longer is the sufferer united to and so embraced, in love and compassion, by the risen Christ and by his or her brothers and sisters within Christ’s body. The Holy Spirit is no longer the bond of unity and life among God’s people, but is often now replaced by some political, national, ethnic, or humanistic fellowship. In themselves, these may be good, but they cannot adequately address the evil of suffering, nor can they provide the consolation of Christ and his body.</p>
<p class="in">Ultimately, many of those who espouse a God who suffers in himself attempt to solve the mystery of suffering though some philosophical cosmology. However, evil, in all its forms and with all its suffering, cannot be conquered by some ahistorical philosophical cosmology of a suffering God. It can merely, at best, be an attempt to explain it. Only the Christian gospel proclaims that sin, the source of all evil and suffering, has been conquered. The Father has defeated sin and death through the <a id="page_262" class="calibre3"></a>historical death and resurrection of his incarnate Son. All of humankind can only share fully in this victory, in the midst of their historical suffering, by being united through the Holy Spirit to his historical and earthly body, the church, and so be united to the living and glorious Christ.</p>
<p class="sec"><b class="calibre8">Causes of and Responses to Human Suffering</b></p>
<p class="pn">Having discussed two cardinal truths that bear upon suffering in general or as a whole, I now wish to address some specific types of suffering and the various Christian responses to them. Pope John Paul II states that what makes suffering uniquely human is that it gives rise to the question: Why? It is this very question that makes human suffering so emotionally painful.</p>
<p class="bq1">Only the suffering human being knows that he is suffering and wonders why; and he suffers in a humanly speaking still deeper way if he does not find a satisfactory answer. This <i class="calibre5">is a difficult question</i>.<sup class="calibre6">40</sup></p>
<p class="in">Christian revelation, as recorded in the Bible, provides a rich account of the causes of and the reasons for suffering. The Bible is a very realistic book, and thus it grasps that, while suffering is ultimately due to the evil of sin, there are many varieties of suffering which originate from different sinful and evil sources. Equally, it perceives that suffering serves many, and often inter-related, purposes which necessitate diverse responses.</p>
<p class="in">One of the weaknesses of those who advocate a passible and suffering God is their often somewhat simplistic view of the causes and types of human suffering. They are rightly aware that suffering is perpetrated against the innocent, the oppressed, and the marginalized. Remember that Auschwitz is the contemporary icon of human suffering. Suffering, within their theology, is most often placed therefore within an unjust and repressive political, cultural, and economic milieu. The history of the world since Auschwitz only adds to this overwhelming truth. However, suffering cannot be placed exclusively within such a context. Suffering, with its various causes, is much more complex, and equally how it is experienced and interpreted is more complex. While the following account of the varieties and purposes of suffering will not be exhaustive, it is hoped that it will provide a much fuller account, and therefore a more adequate and realistic description and explanation than that provided by many who espouse a passible God.</p>
<p class="sec"><b class="calibre8">Suffering Due to Personal Sin</b></p>
<p class="pn">What is often overlooked or forgotten within contemporary theology is that one of the greatest causes, if not the greatest cause, of suffering within the lives of all human persons is their own personal acts of sin. Suffering is the offspring born of sin. From within the biblical perspective <a id="page_263" class="calibre3"></a>sin contains its own punishment – suffering – even to the extent of suffering damnation. Adam and Eve suffered the consequences of their sin – separation from God, friction and division among themselves, and death (see Gen. 3). The Israelites were carried off to Assyria. ‘This occurred because the people of Israel had sinned against the L<small class="calibre10">ORD</small> their God’ (2 Kgs 17:6–7). Because the Israelites rebelled against God and killed the prophets, ‘therefore you [God] gave them into the hands of their enemies, who made them suffer’ (Neh. 9:26–27). The Book of Psalms portrays the evil-doer as suffering the results of his own folly.</p>
<p class="bq1">They made a pit, digging it out, and fall into the hole that they have made. Their mischief returns upon their own heads, and on their own heads their violence descends. Ps. 7:15–16; see also Pss 37:1–3, 38:3, 52:1–5, 73:12–20, 92:7.</p>
<p class="pn">Ultimately, God holds each person accountable for his or her own actions, and thus each person suffers the inevitable punishment due to sin (see Ezek. 18).</p>
<p class="in">The works of the sinful flesh – immorality, impurity, licentiousness, idolatry, sorcery, enmity, strife, jealousy, anger, selfishness, dissension, party spirit, envy, murder, drunkenness, carousing, and the like – do not just cause others to suffer, they equally bring suffering upon the perpetrator of such actions (see Gal. 5:19–21; Rom. 1:29–30). This is easily witnessed in the drunkard and the drug addict, but it is also true of the person who commits any sin. One has only to examine one’s own life to perceive how much of one’s suffering – anxiousness, distress, fear and guilt – is due to one’s own sinful attitudes and actions.</p>
<p class="in">Pride breeds selfish ambition and the craving for recognition, and so gives rise to worry and dread. Arrogance, while displaying the veneer of bravado, actually hides the suffering due to low self-esteem and the lack of inner confidence. But this in turn gives rise to the dread of being exposed, which causes nervousness, disquietude, and the fear of failure. Greed drives one not only to work beyond what is physically healthy, but also causes great emotional stress. Bitterness, resentment, envy and hatred engender immense emotional agitation, and ultimately distort one’s whole personality. Unbridled lust, whether in thought or deed, undermines not only the dignity of others, but also one’s own self-respect. Lying and deception demand that one be manipulative and controlling, but one then suffers from the lack of open, honest and forthright relationships. One becomes isolated and even paranoid in the pursuit of one’s selfish ends.</p>
<p class="in">It is unnecessary to compile a longer list of various sins with their accompanying forms of suffering. The end result is the same. Sin ultimately causes human beings to loathe themselves with deep inner groans of suffering. If they steel and repress their conscience in an attempt to suppress the suffering, they either become mentally and emotionally impaired, or they become human beings with little moral integrity whatsoever, which is its own form of mental affliction. While it may be impossible to scientifically demonstrate to what extent psychosomatic illness is due to sin, there is little doubt that it can be a contributing factor.</p>
<p class="in"><a id="page_264" class="calibre3"></a>Paul recognized the suffering due to sin’s enslavement. Obedience to sin ‘leads to death’ (Rom. 6:16). ‘For the wages of sin is death’ (Rom. 6:23). Prior to coming to faith in Christ, Christians were ‘living in the flesh.’ Their sinful passions were aroused and they bore ‘the fruit for death’ (Rom. 7:5–6). ‘To set one’s mind on the flesh is death’ (Rom. 8:6). The Letter of James also testifies that ‘desire when it has conceived gives birth to sin; and sin when it is full-grown brings forth death’ (James 1:16). These passages are speaking not only of the death of damnation of which physical death is its symbol, but also of the suffering within this life due to sin. To live a life of sin is to live a life of death with all its suffering.</p>
<p class="in">Now it is precisely from this type of suffering that God wishes to free humankind. God never wants any human person to suffer because of his or her own personal sin. In itself it serves no purpose for the individual sinner other than for one’s own condemnation. However, even such suffering can lead to good. The positive result borne of the suffering of personal sin is that the suffering leads the sinner to repentance. The sinner, because of guilt, shame and embarrassment, becomes so demoralized by his or her suffering, that he or she turns to God in humble repentance.<sup class="calibre6">41</sup> Paul reminded his Corinthian readers that he rejoiced not simply because they grieved, ‘but because you were grieved into repenting; for you felt a godly grief, so that you suffered no loss through us. For godly grief produces a repentance that leads to salvation and brings no regret, but worldly grief produces death’ (2 Cor. 7:9–10). Worldly grief, that is, merely the shame and guilt of doing wrong with no intention of repentance and a change of heart, leads to further suffering and spiritual death. Godly grief, as true repentance accompanied by a firm purpose of amendment, leads to salvation and life. Thus the grief and suffering that necessarily accompanies sin becomes medicinal and remedial. As the author of Second Maccabees noted:</p>
<p class="bq1">Now I urge those who read this book not to be depressed by such calamities, but to recognize that these punishments were designed not to destroy but to discipline our people. In fact, it is a sign of great kindness not to let the impious alone for long, but to punish them immediately …. Therefore he [God] never withdrew his mercy from us. Although he disciplined us with calamities, he does not forsake his own people. For we are suffering because of our own sins. And if our living Lord is angry for a little while, to rebuke and discipline us, <a id="page_265" class="calibre3"></a>he will again be reconciled with his own servants. 2 Macc. 6:12–13, 16; 7:32–33.<sup class="calibre6">42</sup></p>
<p class="in">Pope John Paul II states that this is ‘an extremely important aspect of suffering.’ ‘Suffering must serve <i class="calibre5">for conversion</i>, that is, <i class="calibre5">for the rebuilding of goodness</i> in the subject, who can recognize the divine mercy in this call to repentance.’<sup class="calibre6">43</sup></p>
<p class="in">This is what redemption in Christ is all about. Christ sets the sinner free from personal sin with its suffering so that he or she might be free to live a holy and righteous life of joy and peace. ‘For freedom Christ has set us free’ (Gal. 5:1). Thus, as a person grows in Christian holiness through repentance, prayer, participation in the sacraments, and the striving to live by God’s commandments, the suffering caused by personal sin decreases. This is one of the great and marvelous benefits due to the ongoing work of the Holy Spirit within the lives of Christians who are members of Christ’s body.<sup class="calibre6">44</sup></p>
<p class="in">In concluding this section, it should be noted that Christ, as the head of his body, suffers and grieves due to the sinful actions of his members, for their sin not only enfeebles their own spiritual life, but it equally then impairs the life of the Spirit within his whole body. He equally suffers because of the sinful actions of those who are not members of his body for he loves them and desires their salvation. However, Christ, as the risen Lord and head of his body, responds to such suffering by interceding for all sinners, and by ever sending forth his Spirit to bring about a deeper conversion within his body or to bring others to initial conversion and faith in him. Pope John Paul II stated an obvious historical truth when he wrote:</p>
<p class="bq1">Down through the centuries and generations it has been seen that <i class="calibre5">in suffering there is concealed</i> a particular power that <i class="calibre5">draws a person interiorly close to Christ</i>, a special grace. To this grace many saints, <a id="page_266" class="calibre3"></a>such as St Francis of Assisi, St Ignatius of Loyola and others, owe their profound conversion.<sup class="calibre6">45</sup></p>
<p class="sec"><b class="calibre8">The Good Groaning of Christians</b></p>
<p class="pn">Christians also suffer because they are groaning. However, this groaning is good groaning for it is the groaning that accompanies the taking on of the new life of the Spirit.</p>
<p class="in">First, ‘we have this treasure [of Christ’s glory] in earthen vessels’ (2 Cor. 4:7), and thus we ‘are always being given up to death for Jesus’ sake’ (2 Cor. 4:11). Presently, the ‘earthly tent’ of our sinful mortality is being destroyed, and ‘so indeed we groan, and long to put on our heavenly dwelling.’ Thus, ‘we sigh with anxiety; not that we would be unclothed, but that we would be further clothed so that what is mortal may be swallowed up by life’ (2 Cor. 5:1–4).</p>
<p class="in">Second, growth in holiness is a life-long process, and one that culminates in the eternal life of our heavenly dwelling where we are clothed in the glory of our risen humanity. This growth in holiness involves struggles and groaning as well. Someone (Paul) exhorted Timothy to ‘fight the good fight of faith’ (1 Tim. 6:12). The front line of the Christian battle is within oneself. Paul expressed the conflict well. ‘I do not understand my own actions. For I do not do what I want, but I do the very thing I hate …. Wretched man that I am! Who will deliver me from this body of death?’ (Rom. 7:15, 24; see the whole of vv. 15–24). Paul gave thanks in the knowledge that through Christ he could be delivered (see Rom. 7:25), but he equally realized that there was the constant battle to put to death the sinful attitudes and passions that give rise to sinful deeds. Each day brings its own set of temptations that must be repulsed in the Spirit.</p>
<p class="in">This battle for Christian holiness obviously causes suffering within the Christian. The sin within us does not want to die, and we are loath to crucify it. Jesus told his disciples that ‘if any man would come after me, let him deny himself and take up his cross daily and follow me. For whoever would save his life will lose it; and whoever loses his life for my sake, he will save it’ (Lk 9:23–24; see also Mt 10:38–39, Mk 8:34–38. Luke stresses the daily nature of taking up one’s cross.) It is the denial of one’s sinful drives and the refusal to obey them, which is at the heart of the experience of the cross. The Christian loses, gives up, or puts to death his or her sinful life, the life, in Pauline terminology, of the flesh, so as to save his or her true life, the new life in Christ through the Holy Spirit (see Rom. 6).</p>
<p class="in">Jesus strikingly illustrated the violent nature, and so suffering, of this exercise.</p>
<p class="bq1">If your right eye causes you to sin, pluck it out and throw it away; it is better that you lose one of your members than that your whole body be thrown into hell. And if your right hand causes you to sin, cut it off and throw it away; it is better that you lose one of your <a id="page_267" class="calibre3"></a>members than that your whole body go into hell. Mt 5:29–30; see Mt 18:8–9.</p>
<p class="in">Why did Jesus use such violent language? Are his words mere hyperbole, used for effect? Why not just ‘close one’s eye’ in the face of lustful temptations? Obviously, Jesus did not wish his words to be taken literally, yet he was articulating a Christian truth. If one wishes to live the Christian life, one must do violence to one’s fallen nature. It takes an ardent act of the will, a violent act of the will, to oppose the sin that lies deep within one’s heart so as to put it to death – to crucify it in Christ. Concerning himself Paul stated that ‘I do not box as one beating the air; but I pommel my body and subdue it, lest after preaching to others I myself should be disqualified’ (1 Cor. 9:26–27).<sup class="calibre6">46</sup></p>
<p class="in">This violence obviously causes within the Christian inner groaning for one is striving to free oneself from sin so as to live a righteous and holy life. Again, Paul is also well aware of this type of groaning.</p>
<p class="bq1">We know that the whole creation has been groaning in travail together until now; and not only the creation, but we ourselves, who have the first fruits of the Spirit, groan inwardly as we wait for adoption as sons, the redemption of our bodies. For in this hope we were saved. Rom. 8:22–24.</p>
<p class="in">Christians possess the new life of the Holy Spirit, and so the first fruit of Christ’s resurrection, but they do not yet possess the Spirit’s fulness. They are still groaning in their sin, struggling to be set free in the Spirit, so as to obtain their full adoption as children of the Father. While this is a necessary and painful groaning, a groaning due to the sin from which they must yet be freed, nonetheless it is the groaning of spiritual growth. It is a suffering and groaning in the hope that is held out to them as they await the resurrection of their bodies.<sup class="calibre6">47</sup></p>
<p class="in"><a id="page_268" class="calibre3"></a>Thus, Christians should not lose heart in the midst of this good groaning. As Paul stated, Christians are fighting the good fight of faith. Yes, it is a fight and with this fight comes suffering. But it is a good fight for it is fought in the sure knowledge of faith that the victory has already been won in Christ. As members of his body, they already share in his victory. ‘Fight the good fight of faith; take hold of the eternal life to which you were called when you made the good confession in the presence of many witnesses’ (1 Tim. 6:12).</p>
<p class="in">This groaning is not merely the groaning of individual Christians. It is the groaning of the whole body of Christ, and so it is the groaning of Christ himself. Christ groans in union with his whole body as it strives to appropriate the new life of the Spirit which, as the risen head, he nurtures within his body. Moreover, knowing that Christ groans in communion with his body, all its members, as individuals and as the one church, possess the consolation that their groaning will not be in vain, for it is the risen Christ who groans with and in them, and thus victory is secured.</p>
<p class="in">One final point. The suffering due to personal sin and the groaning to overcome sin are often inter-connected. One may suffer the consequences of one’s sins and simultaneously struggle to be freed from them. Yet, these two types of suffering should not be confused. It is in confusing these two types of suffering that Christianity is often thought to be an onerous and burdensome way of life. However, it is in living the gospel that one is freed from the real oppression of sin, and ultimately from its eternal condemnation, so as to strive, in the freedom of the Spirit, to live in holiness. While humankind labors and is heavy-burdened under the yoke of the slavery of sin, yet Christians learn that in Christ they can find rest. ‘For my yoke is easy, and my burden is light’ (Mt 11:28–30). To be yoked to Christ and so strive to live a virtuous life in the Spirit is far different from being yoked to Satan and so be harnessed to sin.</p>
<p class="sec"><b class="calibre8">The Father Disciplines and Educates His Children</b></p>
<p class="pn">Within the context of the above two types of suffering there is closely aligned a third. Those whom he loves, God disciplines in order to free them from sin, and so educates them in the paths of holiness. This discipline and education takes the form of trials and tests that involve suffering.</p>
<p class="in">Quoting Proverbs 3:11–12, the author of the Letter to the Hebrews reminded his readers of what they should expect from the Father if they are truly his sons.</p>
<p class="bq1">‘My son, do not regard lightly the discipline of the Lord, nor lose courage when you are punished by him. For the Lord disciplines him whom he loves, and chastises every son whom he receives.’ It is for discipline that you have to endure. God is treating you as sons; for what son is there whom his father does not discipline? If you are left without discipline in which all have participated, then you are illegitimate children and not sons. Besides this, we have had earthly fathers to discipline us and we respected them. Shall we not much <a id="page_269" class="calibre3"></a>more be subject to the Father of spirits and live? For they disciplined us for a short time at their pleasure, but he disciplines us for our good, that we may share his holiness. For the moment all discipline seems painful rather than pleasant; later it yields the peaceful fruit of righteousness to those who have been trained by it. Heb. 12:3–11.</p>
<p class="in">While pain and suffering accompany discipline, yet there is a twofold goal of such discipline – freedom from sin and the resulting freedom to live in righteousness and holiness. It is because of this twofold goal that such discipline is an act of fatherly love on the part of God. Because of his mercy, God disciplines his children (see Wis. 11:9–10).</p>
<p class="in">First then, God disciplines those he loves because he does not want them to be condemned in their sin. As Paul told the Corinthians: ‘But when we are judged by the Lord, we are chastened so that we may not be condemned along with the world’ (1 Cor. 11:32). Because one of the goals of discipline is to free the person of sin, it is often depicted within the Bible as refining and purifying. The prophet Malachi told the Israelites that God would send a messenger who will be ‘like a refiner’s fire and like fullers’ soap’ who will purify God’s people and refine them like gold and silver so that they will become his holy people (Mal. 3:3). As Judith, in the face of persecution, reminded her fellow Jews:</p>
<p class="bq1">Remember what he [God] did with Abraham, and how he tested Isaac, and what happened to Jacob …. For he has not tried us with fire, as he did them, to search their hearts, nor has he taken vengeance on us; but the Lord scourges those who are close to him in order to admonish them. Jud. 8:26–27.</p>
<p class="in">Actually, this testing and purification through discipline advances the second goal – the living of a holy life. Within the discipline and accompanying suffering the person advances in holiness, and so simultaneously manifests that one is worthy of God. In the Book of Sirach, Wisdom disciplines her children until she can trust them (see Sir. 4:17). Moreover, those who come to serve the Lord must prepare themselves for testing as gold is tested in fire. It is in such testing that God finds his servants acceptable (see Sir. 2:1–6).</p>
<p class="in">The above is admirably exemplified in the lives of parents. They suffer the trials and tribulations of rearing their children. However, it is this daily responsibility of caring for their children that provides parents with the opportunity to break free of their own selfishness, and simultaneously to go out in love to their children. Married couples in their care for one another and for their children, in the midst of life’s vicissitudes, grow in virtue – patience, fortitude, kindness, compassion, mercy, forgiveness, and love. After the example of Christ, love is in the doing of loving deeds, and it is these loving deeds which foster the growth of love. The suffering of life’s daily hassles, problems, and difficulties can then be the catalyst, if approached in the Spirit, for spiritual growth within the lives of all men and women. Such tribulations are never pleasant and may even cause immense grief and sorrow, yet, in the eyes of God and even in the eyes of the sufferer, they can be the means to heroic sanctity.</p>
<p class="in">Thus, this discipline is not merely a means to spiritual growth, it also <a id="page_270" class="calibre3"></a>allows one to display one’s true metal. Job is the supreme example of this within the Old Testament. Job, in the midst of his trials, remained faithful to God and so his true stature was revealed, a stature that would have otherwise remained hidden.<sup class="calibre6">48</sup> Even Jesus learned what it meant for him to be a loyal Son of the Father through his suffering. ‘Although he was a Son, he learned obedience through what he suffered; and being made perfect he became the source of eternal salvation to all who obey him’ (Heb. 5:8–9). The truth that Jesus is the Son of God is revealed precisely in his suffering and death on the cross (see Mk 15:39). ‘When you have lifted up the Son of man, then you will know that I am he’ (Jn 8:28). Within the Gospel of John it is the cross that is then the revelation of his glory (see Jn 17:1–5).</p>
<p class="in">Thus, through discipline God provides everyone an opportunity to grow in perfection and to manifest one’s holiness, and so be glorified in the midst of one’s suffering. For example, those people who are most admired and respected, no matter what their vocation in life may be, even children and young adults, are not those who never seem to suffer any affliction or hardship, but those who suffer such affliction and hardship with courage, patience, fortitude and love. It is their virtue in the midst of evil that makes them lights to the world around them.</p>
<p class="bq1">Having been disciplined a little, they will receive great good, because God tested them and found them worthy of himself; like gold in the furnace he tried them, and like a sacrificial burnt offering he accepted them. In the time of visitation they will shine forth, and will run like sparks through the stubble. Wis. 3:5–6.</p>
<p class="in">Christians then should actually rejoice in their tribulations for, in being steadfast in the midst of such, they are contributing to their own glory.</p>
<p class="bq1">In this you rejoice, though now for a little while you may have to suffer various trials, so that the genuineness of your faith, more precious than gold which though perishable is tested by fire, may redound to praise and glory and honour at the revelation of Jesus Christ. 1 Pet. 1:6–7.</p>
<p class="pn">Christians rejoice in the their hope.</p>
<p class="bq1">More than that, we rejoice in our sufferings, knowing that suffering produces endurance, and endurance produces character, and character produces hope, and hope does not disappoint us, because God’s love has been poured into our hearts through the Holy Spirit which has been given to us. Rom. 5:2–5.</p>
<p class="in">What must always be kept in mind, when suffering the discipline of the Father, is that the goal is one’s perfection.</p>
<p class="bq1">Count it all joy, my brethren, when you meet various trials, for you know that the testing of your faith produces steadfastness. And let <a id="page_271" class="calibre3"></a>steadfastness have its full effect, that you may be perfect and complete, lacking in nothing. James 1:2–4.</p>
<p class="in">Love – love of God and love of others – given in suffering reaps love’s reward – eternal life. ‘Blessed is the man who endures trial, for when he has stood the test he will receive the crown of life which God has promised to those who love him’ (James 1:12). Thus Christians need not fear the suffering of trials. They need only to stand firm in their faith and trust. ‘Be faithful unto death, and I will give you the crown of life’ (Rev. 2:10).<sup class="calibre6">49</sup></p>
<p class="in">Again, in concluding this section, what has been stated above applies to Christ’s body as a whole. The Father, in mercy and love, can discipline the church in order that it might grow in holiness and manifest its true glory. Throughout its history the church has suffered trials and tribulations, and these, while not always with complete success, have contributed to its upbuilding.<sup class="calibre6">50</sup> (More will be said about this below when we discuss the suffering caused by persecution.)</p>
<p class="sec"><b class="calibre8">Suffering Caused by the Sins of Others</b></p>
<p class="pn">In the light of the above, one particular form of trial must be discussed at some length, that is, the suffering caused by the sins of others. Everyone is sinned against. No one is immune from suffering at the hands of <a id="page_272" class="calibre3"></a>others. It is morally wrong to cause such suffering for the evil done and the suffering that ensues violates the inherent dignity of human persons depriving them of their endowed rights and goods as created in the image and likeness of God. Sins against others always infringe or repudiate their personal well-being.<sup class="calibre6">51</sup> Such sin and suffering is encountered within personal relations – within families and among friends. These wrongs include gossip, slander, theft, physical and sexual abuse, rape, prejudice, hatred, and even murder. On a larger scale suffering is caused by the evils of social, political, and economic injustice that is perpetrated upon whole classes of people because of their race, nationality, social class, economic status, gender, or religion.<sup class="calibre6">52</sup> It is within this context that the suffering of the innocent – the unborn, the poor, the weak, the marginalized, the sick, the physically and mentally handicapped, the elderly and the dying – is most acutely apparent. Moreover, it is within this context that Christians suffer persecution for the sake of the gospel.</p>
<p class="in">It is impossible to discuss all the various scenarios in which all of us suffer at the hands of one another. Nonetheless, a number of important and inter-related questions arise. How are Christians to interpret such suffering? What meaning or value does such suffering contain? Does such suffering possess any gospel significance either for the church as a whole or for individual Christians within it? Moreover, how are those who personally experience this suffering caused by the sins of others and/or who witness such suffering caused by the sins of others to respond? From within a Christian, primarily scriptural, perspective I will now address, under various headings, these and similar questions.</p>
<p class="psec"><b class="calibre9"><i class="calibre5">Obtaining the Father’s Approval</i></b></p>
<p class="pn">While God does not wish people to suffer because of the sinful deeds of others, yet, because sin and evil are inevitable within this life, he uses it <a id="page_273" class="calibre3"></a>for his own good purpose (see Rom. 8:28). Without minimizing the evil and the suffering that it causes, to be sinned against provides the victim an opportunity to respond to such evil in a godly manner, and so to grow in holiness. While one may be a victim of sin and evil, one need not be a passive victim. To be sinned against and to be suffering because of this sin, always calls forth, from within a Christian perspective, a proactive virtuous response.</p>
<p class="in">The First Letter of Peter exhorts its readers to follow the example of Christ who, though he committed no sin, ‘was reviled,’ but ‘he did not revile in return.’ ‘When he suffered, he did not threaten, but he trusted to him who judges justly.’ Christians who suffer for doing wrong receive no credit. However, ‘one is approved if, mindful of God, he endures pain while suffering unjustly ….If when you do right and suffer for it you take it patiently, you have God’s approval’ (1 Pet. 2:18–23). The letter also commands: ‘Do not return evil for evil or reviling for reviling; but on the contrary bless, for to this you have been called’ (1 Pet. 3:9). Even if one is unjustly harmed by others, and so suffers for ‘righteousness sake, you will be blessed.’</p>
<p class="bq1">Have no fear of them, nor be troubled, but in your hearts reverence Christ as Lord … keep your conscience clear, so that, when you are abused, those who revile your good behaviour in Christ may be put to shame. For it is better to suffer for doing right, if that should be God’s will, than for doing wrong. For Christ also died for sin once for all, the righteous for the unrighteous, that he might bring us to God. 1 Pet. 3:14–18.</p>
<p class="in">This kind of exhortation chafes our fallen nature. Our instinctive response is to answer in kind, but to do so means that we create a situation where one sin is answered by another – our own. Thus, instead of exploiting the sins committed against us as an opportunity for growth in virtue, we aggravate the sinful situation by adding our own sin. While one may be justly angry at the evil done, one must not ‘let the sun go down on your anger, and give no opportunity to the devil’ (Eph. 4:26–27). The devil loves nothing more than for sinful and evil situations to spiral out of control by mutual recrimination, and he will do all in his power to ensure that such does happen. Satan glories in the suffering and anguish caused by the reciprocating salvoes of sin.<sup class="calibre6">53</sup></p>
<p class="in">While it is very difficult to do, and can only be done by the power of the Holy Spirit, Christians are called to respond to the sins of others after the manner of Christ. While forthrightly confronting the evil with truth and justice, yet one must do so with endurance, patience, forgiveness, and love.</p>
<p class="psec"><a id="page_274" class="calibre3"></a><b class="calibre9"><i class="calibre5">Forgiving One’s Enemies</i></b></p>
<p class="pn">While one rightly acknowledges that evil has been done and ardently strives for its removal, yet equally the Christian is called to forgive the evil-doer and to strive to love the sinner.</p>
<p class="bq1">You have heard that it was said, ‘You shall love your neighbour and hate your enemy’ But I say to you, Love your enemies and pray for those who persecute you, so that you may be sons of your Father in heaven; for he makes his sun rise on the evil and on the good, and sends rain on the just and on the unjust. For if you love those who love you, what reward have you? Do not even the tax collectors do the same? And if you salute only your brethren, what more are you doing than others? Do not even the Gentiles do the same? You, therefore, must be perfect as your heavenly Father is perfect. Mt 5:43–58, see also 39–42; Lk 6:27–36.<sup class="calibre6">54</sup></p>
<p class="in">To forgive and even to love those who sin against us is undoubtedly the most difficult of Jesus’ commands. Again, it is contrary to everything our fallen nature embodies. Our dignity and rights have been unjustly violated. Right is on our side. And rightly, we can wish, and even demand, that no such evil perpetrated against us be repeated. Yet Christian perfection, in imitation of the Father, resides primarily in being merciful for his own perfect goodness is displayed in his mercy (see Lk 6:36). In forgiveness Christians prove that they are truly sons of God for they make their own the words of Jesus, the Son: ‘Father, forgive them; for they know not what they do’ (Lk 23:34).</p>
<p class="in">What is often forgotten in our frequent self-righteous struggle to forgive is that we too have often sinned against others causing them to suffer. We forget that we too are in need of mercy and forgiveness.</p>
<p class="bq1">Let all bitterness and wrath and anger and clamour and slander be put away from you, with all malice, and be kind to one another, tenderhearted, forgiving one another, as God in Christ Jesus forgave you. Eph. 4:31–32; see Col. 3:13.</p>
<p class="in">Jesus not only told Peter that we must forgive ‘seventy times seven,’ but also that his heavenly Father will withhold his mercy and forgiveness to those who refuse mercy and forgiveness (see Mt 18:23–35). In the ‘Our Father’ Jesus specifically taught us to pray that the Father would forgive us as we have forgiven others (see Mt 6:12). To refuse to forgive and to pray such a prayer is to call down judgment upon oneself. Judgment will be without mercy upon those who have shown no mercy; yet ‘mercy <a id="page_275" class="calibre3"></a>triumphs over judgment’ (James 2:13). Moreover, as Paul reminded the Romans, they are to ‘bless those who persecute you; bless and do not curse them’ (Rom. 12:14). They are to leave judgment, and even wrath and vengeance, in the hands of God. ‘Do not be overcome by evil, but overcome evil with good’ (Rom. 12:19–21).</p>
<p class="in">This gospel teaching on mercy and forgiveness in the midst of sin and evil is difficult to implement, and again without the Holy Spirit it is impossible. Many consider such acts of mercy and forgiveness degrading and impractical. Yet, it resides at the very heart of who God is in his perfect and unchanging love. Moreover, it is equally at the heart of Jesus’ work of redemption, for he is the only completely innocent person who suffered unjustly even unto death, and in so doing won mercy and forgiveness for all of humankind. If one examines the wars and conflicts (even among individuals) today, in which many innocent people suffer immense injustice, most, if not all, of them are due to the absence of mercy and forgiveness. Hatred, bitterness, and resentment nurtured on past, and sometimes long past, injuries have so marred and distorted the psyche of whole peoples and nations that, in vengeance, they perpetrate the same evils upon others that have been perpetrated upon them. And so the cycle of evil, due to a lack of mercy and forgiveness, continues unabated and ever increases. Jesus has provided a practical solution to a very practical problem – how to respond to the suffering caused by the sins of others – and the answer is the one that he himself made possible – mercy and forgiveness.<sup class="calibre6">55</sup></p>
<p class="psec"><a id="page_276" class="calibre3"></a><b class="calibre9"><i class="calibre5">The Vanquishing of Evil</i></b></p>
<p class="pn">While forgiveness is a virtuous act, so too is the fight against evil. Whether one is a Christian or not, all must strive to ensure, within one’s capability and within moral bounds, that those who perpetrate evil cease to do so. Obviously, one may not be successful, nonetheless all are called to combat evil and alleviate the suffering it causes. From within a Christian perspective this fosters the kingdom of God and cultivates peace and justice within this world. It is a fundamental task of the body of Christ, a task that actually nurtures and strengthens the life of the Spirit within the body, for it is in accord with Christ’s own will and action. This endeavor to vanquish evil and to assuage the suffering left in its wake, in tandem with the furtherance of truth, justice and harmony sanctifies individuals and the body of Christ as a whole. However, it contains a twofold paradox.</p>
<p class="in">First, one is more likely to assail evil and to embrace suffering on behalf of others the more one is freed from the suffering due to one’s own personal sin. The more one is engrossed in pursuing one’s own selfish ends, and so is paralyzed by the suffering that such self-centeredness causes, the less one will be compassionately concerned about the well-being of others. The Christian paradox is that Christ redeems us from the suffering due to our own sin so that we might be free to confront evil and embrace those, in love, who suffer from such evil, making their suffering our own. In actual lived experience, the suffering caused by the sin of others, whether the evil is enacted against us personally or to others, often impels us to rise above our selfish inclinations and so take up the cause of truth and justice<sup class="calibre6">56</sup> In so doing Jesus empowers us in the Spirit, after the example of his own life, to bear witness to the truth, embrace the suffering involved, and promote the good.</p>
<p class="in">Second, in confronting evil with its concomitant suffering, one, by necessity, embraces suffering. One, in love and compassion, not only suffers in solidarity with those who suffer, but one also makes oneself vulnerable to those who are perpetrating the evil<sup class="calibre6">57</sup> For example, in today’s pro-abortion climate, a young medical student who refuses to perform abortions is not only defending the lives of the unborn, but can equally be putting his or her medical career in jeopardy. Or, to contest <a id="page_277" class="calibre3"></a>economic, political and social injustice may easily lead to violence being perpetrated against oneself. ‘Indeed all who desire to live a godly life in Christ Jesus will be persecuted, while evil men and impostors will go on from bad to worse, deceivers and deceived’ (2 Tim. 3:12). History abounds with examples of such heroic godly men and women who gave their lives for the cause of truth and in the defense of others<sup class="calibre6">58</sup> Jesus’ promise must be remembered: ‘Blessed are those who are persecuted for righteousness’ sake, for theirs is the kingdom of heaven’ (Mt 5:10).</p>
<p class="psec"><b class="calibre9"><i class="calibre5">Sharing in the Sufferings of Christ</i></b></p>
<p class="pn">It is here then that we, from a Christian perspective, must once more take up the topic of sharing in the sufferings of Christ. By actively confronting sin and evil and by bearing witness to truth, goodness, and justice, Christians participate in the redemptive work of Christ. Christians ‘complete what is lacking in Christ’s afflictions for the sake of his body, that is, the church’ (Col. 1:24). In uniting themselves to the cross of Christ, Christians embrace the suffering due to sin, and offer their lives, in union with Christ, for the redemption of all – even for those who are perpetrating the evil. While Christ’s work of redemption has been accomplished once for all, yet Pope John Paul II has stated:</p>
<p class="bq1">In the mystery of the Church as his Body, Christ has in a sense opened his own redemptive suffering to all human suffering. Insofar as man becomes a sharer in Christ’s suffering – in any part of the world and at any time in history – in that extent <i class="calibre5">he in his own way completes</i> the suffering through which Christ accomplished the Redemption of the world.</p>
<p class="in">Christ’s redemption, ‘through satisfactory love, <i class="calibre5">remains always open to all love</i> expressed <i class="calibre5">in human suffering</i>.’ Thus Christ’s redemptive suffering lives on and develops.</p>
<p class="bq1">It lives and develops as the Body of Christ, the Church, and in this dimension every human suffering, by reason of the loving union with Christ, completes the suffering of Christ. It completes that suffering <i class="calibre5">just as the Church completes the redemptive work of Christ</i>. <sup class="calibre6">59</sup></p>
<p class="in">Jesus did not give Christians a philosophical answer to the meaning of suffering. Rather, as Pope John Paul has again stated, he exhorted his disciples:</p>
<p class="bq1">‘Follow me!’ Come! Take part through your suffering in this work of saving the world, a salvation achieved through my suffering! <a id="page_278" class="calibre3"></a>Through my cross! Gradually, <i class="calibre5">as the individual takes up his cross</i>, spiritually uniting himself to the cross of Christ, the salvific meaning of suffering is revealed before him. He does not discover this meaning at his own human level, but at the level of the suffering of Christ.<sup class="calibre6">60</sup></p>
<p class="in">Christians, in their own suffering, and in solidarity with and on behalf of others, offer their lives, in union with Christ, as a sacrifice, even unto death, not only to achieve peace and justice within the world, but also for the eternal salvation of all. The Father comforts Christians so that they may be able to ‘comfort those who are in any affliction, with the same comfort with which we ourselves are comforted by God. For as we share abundantly in Christ’s sufferings, so through Christ we share abundantly in comfort too’ (1 Cor. 1:3–5). By suffering in loving union with others and comforting them with the Father’s love and the hope of Jesus’ resurrection, Christians willingly and even, because of the Father’s love and Jesus’ resurrection, joyfully fulfil, in a supreme manner, Christ’s new commandment.<sup class="calibre6">61</sup> ‘This is my commandment, that you love one another as I have loved you. Greater love has no man than this, that a man lay down his life for his friends’ (Jn 15:12–13).</p>
<p class="in">It is not merely Christians who suffer on behalf of others and lay down their lives. As already quoted above, Pope John Paul II sees such suffering as participating in the sufferings of Christ, not only for those who are Christians, but ‘in many others also who, at times, even without belief in Christ, suffer and give their lives for the truth and for a just cause. In the sufferings of all of these people the great dignity of man is strikingly confirmed.’<sup class="calibre6">62</sup></p>
<p class="psec"><b class="calibre9"><i class="calibre5">Suffering for the Sake of the Gospel</i></b></p>
<p class="pn">While the above discussion did not exclude the suffering caused by religious persecution and often implied it, it purposely did not address this issue directly. The reason being that, while much of what has been said above is relevant, the New Testament has quite specific instructions for Christians who endure persecution.<sup class="calibre6">63</sup></p>
<p class="in">First, Christians are to expect persecution. This expectation is squarely founded upon the persecution of Jesus himself. If he suffered death for doing the work of the Father, then his followers must anticipate the same fate. According to the Gospel of John, because his disciples are not of this world as he is not of this world, Jesus assured them that, as the world hated him, so it will equally hate them. ‘Remember the word that I said to you, “A servant is not greater than his master.” If they persecuted me, <a id="page_279" class="calibre3"></a>they will persecute you’ (Jn 15:18, 20; see 1 Jn 3:13, Mt 10:24–25). He fore-warned them that they would be handed over to sanhedrins and governors, where they would be beaten and scourged. Jesus bluntly stated that he did not come to bring peace, rather his gospel would bring division even within families (see Lk 12:51–53). ‘Brother will deliver up brother to death, and the father his child …, and you will be hated by all for my name’s sake’ (Mt 10:21–22; see Mt 10:17–23, Mk 13: 9–13, Lk 21:12–19).<sup class="calibre6">64</sup></p>
<p class="in">Historically the apostolic church forthwith became aware that Jesus’ warnings were indeed accurate. The Acts of the Apostles is a narration of the persecutions, and even death, of the first Christians who courageously proclaimed the gospel (see Acts 4:1–31, 5:17–42, 7:1–60, 9:1–2, 12:1–19, 16:16–24, 18:1–11, 19:21—26:32). Paul was well aware that this was an evil age in which those who followed Christ would suffer many trials (see Gal. 1:4; Eph. 5:16; 2 Thess. 3:2–3). He detailed what he himself, as a prisoner in the Lord, suffered for the sake of the gospel (see 2 Cor. 6:1–10, 11:22–33, 12:7–10; Eph. 41; Phil. 1:13, 4:12–13; 1 Thess. 2:2, 2 Tim. 1:8, 3:10–11). The apostles are ‘sentenced to death,’ ‘a spectacle to the world,’ ‘fools for Christ’s sake,’ ‘the refuse of the world, the offscouring of all things’ (1 Cor. 4:9–13). The epistles abound with warnings of impending persecutions or references to the sufferings their readers were presently enduring, many of which make reference to imitating the sufferings of Christ (see Phil. 1:28–29; 1 Thess. 1:6, 2:14, 3:3–5; 2 Tim. 4:5; Heb. 10:32–39, 13:3 and 13, 1 Pet. 2:21–25, 3:13–17, 4:1–6 and 12–19). The Book of Revelation envisions persecution in an apocalyptic manner. Babylon the Great, the mother of all prostitutes will become ‘drunk with the blood of the saints and martyrs of Jesus’ (Rev. 17:5–6; see 18:24).</p>
<p class="in">Second, in the midst of certain persecution Christians are not to cower in fear. Despite Jesus’ grim vision for his future followers, their response was not to be one of distress and dread. In the face of accusations and charges they should not be anxious about what they are to say. ‘Say whatever is given you in that hour, for it is not you who speak, but the Holy Spirit’ (Mk 13:11–12). Not only is the Spirit with them, but they are, even in the midst of persecution, embraced by the providential care of God. While they will be hated because of Jesus’ name, not a hair of their head will perish. ‘By your endurance you will gain your lives’ (Lk 21:18–19).</p>
<p class="in">Third, Christians are not to be ashamed of bearing witness to the crucified Jesus as Lord, but ‘as good soldiers’ they must be willing to take their ‘share of suffering for the gospel in the power of God’ (2 Tim. 1:8 and 2:3). Courage is the virtue of the Christian apostle (see 1 Cor. 16:13). ‘The following night the Lord stood by him [Paul] and said, “Take courage, for as you have testified about me at Jerusalem, so you must bear witness also in Rome’” (Acts 23:11). Christians must possess steadfastness, perseverance and faith in the midst of every trial and tribulation rejoicing in the knowledge that they do not labour in vain (see 1 Cor. <a id="page_280" class="calibre3"></a>15:58; Phil. 4:4–6; Col. 1:11, 23; 2 Tim. 2:12; Heb. 10:35; James 1:12, 5:10–11; Rev. 13:10). ‘Therefore we ourselves boast of you in the churches of God for your steadfastness and faith in all your persecutions and in the afflictions which you are enduring’ (1 Thess. 1:4). Notwithstanding persecution and death, Christians must above all ‘contend for the faith’ (Jude 3).<sup class="calibre6">65</sup></p>
<p class="in">Fourth, persecution must be interpreted in the light of Jesus’ resurrection. This is the ultimate assurance of hope that, even in the face of death itself, they will obtain life. Christians know that they will come to eat and drink in Jesus’ kingdom (see Lk 22:28–30). This very suffering for the sake of the gospel is what makes them worthy of such a reward.</p>
<p class="bq1">This is evidence of the righteous judgement of God, that you may be made worthy of the kingdom of God, for which you are suffering – since indeed God deems it just to repay with affliction those who afflict you, and to grant rest with us to you who are afflicted, when the Lord Jesus is revealed from heaven with his mighty angels in flaming fire. 2 Thess. 1:5–7.</p>
<p class="in">Paul knew well that ‘The Lord will rescue me from every evil and save me for his heavenly kingdom’ (2 Tim. 4:18). Christians must remember that ‘this slight momentary affliction is preparing for us an eternal weight of glory beyond all comparison’ (2 Cor. 4:17). Because they look to what is unseen, Christians can rejoice in such persecution.</p>
<p class="bq1">Beloved, do not be surprised at the fiery ordeal which comes upon you to prove you, as though something strange were happening to you. But rejoice in so far as you share Christ’s sufferings, that you may also rejoice and be glad when his glory is revealed. If you are reproached for the name of Christ, you are blessed, because the spirit of glory and of God rests upon you. 1 Pet. 4:12–14.</p>
<p class="in">Lastly, glory – to give glory to Jesus through the preaching of the gospel – is the glory of the Christian. While one should not seek martyrdom, yet to suffer for the sake of the gospel and even to die for the name of Jesus is a Christian’s supreme honor. It is the Christian’s consummate boast.<sup class="calibre6">66</sup> The world may presently rejoice while Christians weep, but upon seeing the glorious Jesus their ‘hearts will rejoice,’ and no one will take that joy from them (Jn 16:20–22; see Rev. 11:11–12). Jesus assured those who suffer on his account that they are indeed blessed, and so should rejoice. ‘Blessed are you when men revile you and persecute you and utter all kinds of evil against you falsely on my account. Rejoice and be glad, for your reward is great in heaven’ (Mt 5:11). The martyrs are the ones ‘who have come out of the great tribulation; they have <a id="page_281" class="calibre3"></a>washed their robes and made them white in the blood of the Lamb.’ Therefore, they will find rest and comfort ‘before the throne of God’ (Rev. 7:14–15). They have conquered Satan ‘by the blood of the Lamb and by the word of their testimony, for they loved not their lives even unto death. Rejoice then, O heaven and you that dwell therein!’ Rev. 12:11–12.</p>
<p class="sec"><b class="calibre8">The Cross: The Glory of Man</b></p>
<p class="pn">In this chapter we have seen that the Christian experience of human suffering is rich in significance. Human beings may suffer because of their own personal sinfulness, or for the sake of God’s discipline, or because of the sins of others. However, all suffering, whatever its cause, is to redound to the glory of those who suffer. In the light of the cross of Christ, while suffering may be due to evil, it can be transfigured through the Holy Spirit into a means of obtaining and manifesting heroic virtue.<sup class="calibre6">67</sup></p>
<p class="in">I have written at length about the Christian experience and interpretation of human suffering not only because it is crucial for understanding the gospel, but also because it is central to this study. Those who espouse a suffering God often fail to perceive the richness of the Christian experience of human suffering, nor do they appreciate the depth of the Christian response to human suffering. Moreover, they do not fully grasp the glory embodied and the virtue expressed within the Christian account of suffering. They rightfully comprehend the immense suffering which evil causes. However, they frequently limit the meaning of suffering to that of merely being the suffering of a passive victim of grave injustice and evil. Having limited the meaning of such suffering to that of a passive victim, they attempt to compensate for its now seeming ‘meaninglessness’ by espousing a God who suffers in solidarity with the victim. This co-suffering of God with the suffering victim is intended to engender hope and consolation. At times one feels that what they wish is a God who feels sorry for them because of their plight – a God who authenticates and justifies their self-pity. Actually, such a view, as the above demonstrates, radically diminishes the salvific significance of Christ’s redemptive suffering and so the import of his body, as the whole church and as individual members within it, which actively co-suffers with him for its own sanctification and for humankind’s well-being and salvation.</p>
<p class="in">While the cross reveals the great love of the Father, in that he was willing to send his Son into the world, and while the cross reveals the glory of the Son, in that he was willing to assume authentic human suffering for humankind’s salvation, yet this is not the sole meaning of the cross. The cross now also reveals the glory of all those men and <a id="page_282" class="calibre3"></a>women who equally suffer, in accordance with the Father’s will and in union with Christ, for the sake of their own sanctification and that of their brothers and sisters. From within a Christian perspective the meaning and value of redemptive suffering is always placed within history and the concrete lives of human beings for it is here that men and women of flesh and blood encounter evil and endure suffering. It is equally within time and history that the body of Christ, by actively embracing the cross, advances in holiness and co-operates in the labour of salvation. The meaning and value of suffering must never be relegated to some divine mythical ahistorical sphere. For the Father, the cross of suffering is ultimately for the glory of his Son and for the glory of those who suffer in union with him, and not for his own self-aggrandizement.</p>
<p class="in">It must be remembered that while the Father detests all evil and grieves over all who suffer, yet his response is not that of being overwrought or alarmed. Rather he, as with his Son, is well-pleased with those who are willing to suffer for the sake of righteousness. He rejoices and glories in their courage, their nobility, their faith, their hope, and in their love. He comprehends, more even than those who suffer, their glory and the glory to which they are attaining – that of eternal blessedness.</p>
<p class="in">Allow me to close with one remarkable example of a person who beautifully illustrates, in her own life, most of what has been discussed in this chapter.</p>
<p class="sec"><b class="calibre8">Edith Stein: Completing the Afflictions of Christ</b></p>
<p class="pn">Saint Edith Stein (Sister Teresa Benedicta of the Cross, OCD) is an especially appropriate example, in the context of this present study, of a person who groaned because of her own sinfulness and suffered the purifying discipline of God. Moreover, and more so, she exemplifies a person who made her own suffering and death a sharing in the sufferings of Christ for the salvation of her own Jewish people and for the redemption of her German nation.<sup class="calibre6">68</sup></p>
<p class="in"><a id="page_283" class="calibre3"></a>Edith was born on <i class="calibre5">Yom Kippur</i> (The Day of Atonement), 12 October 1891. While she was raised within a devout Jewish family, at the age of fifteen Edith gave up the practise of her faith, and said that she could no longer believe in a personal God. Nonetheless, Edith maintained throughout this period of unbelief her special gift to empathize with others. Later, her doctoral thesis would be entitled <i class="calibre5">On the Problem of Empathy</i>.<sup class="calibre6">69</sup> During her years at the University of Göttingen she studied philosophy, and came under the influence of its renowned philosophers, many of whom had become Christians, either Lutheran or Catholic – Adolf Reinach, Theodor Conrad, Hedwig Martius, Dietrich von Hildebrand, Max Scheler, and Edmund Husserl. This circle of philosophical colleagues and friends provided her with the intellectual and spiritual environment in which she could reconsider her own religious stance.<sup class="calibre6">70</sup> She slowly, but steadily, was drawn to Christianity. After an all-night reading of St Teresa of Avila’s autobiography, she exclaimed: ‘This is the truth.’ Even though it caused anguish among her Jewish relatives, especially for her mother, Edith decided to become a Catholic, and on 1 January 1922 she was baptized. Her natural intelligence coupled with her work in phenomenology and her study and translation of Aquinas and John Henry Cardinal Newman made her a rising luminary among the Catholic intellectuals of Europe.<sup class="calibre6">71</sup> Moreover, her concern for women motivated her to lecture and write extensively on the education of women and on their importance and status within the family and society.<sup class="calibre6">72</sup> While she had obtained a teaching post in Münster, she was forced to abandon it because of Hitler’s anti-Jewish legislation. Clearly perceiving what was happening to her and around her, she foresaw that danger was at hand for Jews and Christians alike. She wrote at this time: ‘Now on a sudden it was luminously clear to me that once again God’s hand lay heavy on his people, and that the destiny of this people was my <a id="page_284" class="calibre3"></a>own.’<sup class="calibre6">73</sup> Edith, in her desire to embrace the suffering of her people and to combat the evil which she saw swelling around her, became convinced that her long-cherished yearning to be a Carmelite Nun was indeed God’s will. She desired this vocation not only because of her initial love of St Teresa of Avila, but more so because she discerned that the specific Carmelite charism was that of embracing the cross of Christ for the salvation of the world. As Edith later wrote:</p>
<p class="bq1">Everyone who, in the course of time, has borne an onerous destiny in remembrance of the suffering Saviour or who has freely taken up works of expiation has by doing so cancelled some of the mighty load of human sin and has helped the Lord carry his burden. Or rather, Christ the head effects expiation in these members of his Mystical Body who put themselves, body and soul, at his disposal for carrying out his work of salvation.<sup class="calibre6">74</sup></p>
<p class="pn">On 14 October 1933 Edith entered the Mary Queen of Peace Carmel in Cologne. In the wake of <i class="calibre5">Kristallnacht</i> (9 November 1938) she was persuaded to flee to the Carmel in Echt, Holland on 31 December. On Passion Sunday (26 March 1939), the day after Hitler declared that Poland must be totally subjected, Edith wrote a note to her prioress.</p>
<p class="bq1">Dear Mother, I beg your Reverence’s permission to offer myself to the Heart of Jesus as a sacrificial expiation for the sake of true peace: that the Antichrist’s sway may be broken, if possible without another world-war, and that a new order may be established. I am asking this today because it is already the twelfth hour. I know that I am nothing, but Jesus wills it, and he will call many more to the same sacrifice in these days.<sup class="calibre6">75</sup></p>
<p class="in">In 1941 Edith’s sister, Rosa, having also become a Catholic, joined her at Echt as a third-order Carmelite. Hitler invaded Holland in May, and on 1 September both sisters were required to wear the Yellow Star of David inscribed with the word ‘Jew.’ On 26 July 1942 the Dutch bishops published a pastoral letter condemning the Nazis’ treatment and deportation of Jews. In reprisal the Nazi authorities decreed that all Catholics of Jewish ancestry be arrested. Edith and Rosa were taken from their convent that same evening. As they were escorted away under armed guard, Edith’s words to her sister were: ‘Come, let us go for our people.’<sup class="calibre6">76</sup> During the ensuing week they were taken first to two Dutch concentration camps, and finally to Auschwitz. When she was arrested she was in the process of attempting to finish her study on the writings of St John of the Cross. While this book was never completed, during her final days, <a id="page_285" class="calibre3"></a>Edith’s own life became its completion, its final chapter, for she lived out to the very end <i class="calibre5">The Science of the Cross</i>.<sup class="calibre6">77</sup></p>
<p class="in">Later, witnesses who survived the deportations spoke of Edith’s love of and care for her fellow sufferers. Even one of her captors would testify that when he met her at the Dutch camp at Westerbork that he knew she was a holy woman.</p>
<p class="bq1">She was in the hell of Westerbork only a few days, walking among the prisoners, talking and praying like a saint. Yes, that’s what she was. That’s the impression which this elderly woman gave, though, on the other hand, she seemed quite young. She spoke in such a clear and humble way that anybody who listened to her was seized. A talk with her was like a visit to another world.<sup class="calibre6">78</sup></p>
<p class="pn">According to the Dutch Red Cross, Edith and Rosa arrived at Auschwitz in the early morning of 9 August 1942 where they were exterminated that same day.</p>
<p class="in">Some months previously Edith had written:</p>
<p class="bq1">I am quite content in any case. One can only learn a ‘Science of the Cross’ if one feels the cross in one’s own person. I was convinced of this from the very first and have said with all my heart ‘Hail Cross, our only hope.’<sup class="calibre6">79</sup></p>
<p class="pn">Edith Stein was not the only person, Jew or Gentile, who gave their lives in loving sacrifice within Hitler’s barbarous and inhuman death camps.<sup class="calibre6">80</sup> Yet, as a Jewish Christian, she, in a unique manner, through her life and especially in her death, spoke her own answer to the Holocaust and to all similar examples of man’s barbarity perpetrated against his fellow human beings. She must suffer <i class="calibre5">on behalf of, ‘for</i> our people.’ This was the very answer, she believed, which had been provided by her heavenly <a id="page_286" class="calibre3"></a>Father and which had been obediently carried out by his Son in the love of the Spirit. So, in communion with Christ, one was called to offer one’s own life as an atonement for sin for the salvation of all.<sup class="calibre6">81</sup> Edith did not simply perceive the intellectual meaning of Paul’s words, rather she actually embodied their truth in her own life, and in so doing bore witness to their truth. ‘Now I rejoice in my suffering for your sake, and in my flesh I complete what is lacking in Christ’s afflictions for the sake of his body, that is, the church’ (Col 1:24).<sup class="calibre6">82</sup></p>
<p class="ntcon">1  There are obviously other attempts at a philosophical or religious answer to the mystery of suffering, but whatever solution is offered it can only be partially true at best and erroneous at worst.</p>
<p class="ntnlf">2  <i class="calibre5">Salvifici Doloris</i>, nn. 19 and 20. This is the first official Roman Catholic document that specifically treats the subject of suffering. The Pope’s reference to Job’s foreseeing the resurrection may have been taken from St Gregory the Great, who makes the same point in his <i class="calibre5">Expositio in Librum lob</i>, 14, 67.</p>
<p class="ntnlf">3  As with the previous chapter, my discussion of human suffering and its meaning will be primarily from a scriptural perspective. Other authors will be cited only to illustrate this scriptural understanding. For extracts from, as well as the teaching of the Fathers on suffering, see J. Walsh and R.G. Walsh, <i class="calibre5">Divine Providence and Human Suffering</i> (Wilmington: Michael Glazier, 1985).</p>
<p class="ntnlf">4  It must be remembered that, while I wish to be as practical and concrete as possible, what I say about the Christian experience, interpretation and response to evil and to the suffering that it causes does not in any way imply that all Christians actually, within their own hearts and minds, experience, interpret and respond to such suffering in this manner. How to experience, interpret and respond to evil and to the suffering that it causes in a Christian manner can itself be a life-long, and often unfinished, process.</p>
<p class="ntnlf">5  It is because of this likeness and difference between the human body and the body of Christ that the Christian tradition, especially within Catholic Church, has termed this reality ‘the Mystical Body of Christ.’ The term ‘Mystical Body,’ first, wishes to assert that the body of Christ is more than a moral entity, but, like the human body, is indeed one living reality. Pope Pius XII stated in his encyclical <i class="calibre5">Mystici Corporis</i>:</p>
<p class="bq1f">In the body which is called moral, there is no other principle of unity than the common end and the common pursuit by all of the same end by means of a social authority. But in the Mystical Body of which we are speaking, another internal principle of unity is added to this common pursuit, which, existing truly in the entire organism as well as in each one of its parts, and active there, is of such excellence that by itself it immeasurably surpasses every other body of unity which supplies the cohesive force for any body, whether physical or moral.</p>
<p class="ntnl">Moreover, the term ‘Mystical Body’ specifies that Christ’s body, unlike the human body, is composed of distinct human persons who do not lose their distinctiveness in becoming members of his body. As Pius XII stated:</p>
<p class="bq1f">For while in the natural body the principle of unity joins all the parts in such a way that each one lacks in an absolute manner what is called proper subsistence, on the contrary in the Mystical Body the force of the mutual union, although intimate, joins all the members among themselves in such a way that each one of them has full enjoyment of his proper personality.</p>
<p class="ntnl">And third, Christ’s body is mystical in that it is formed into one reality not by some natural principle of life as is the human body, but by the supernatural life of the Holy Spirit, who is the soul or life principle of the body of Christ. Again Pius XII asserted:</p>
<p class="bq1f">It is to this Spirit of Christ as to an invisible principle that is to be attributed the fact that all the parts are united among themselves as well as with their sublime Head, since he is entire in the Head, entire in the Body, entire in each of the members …. [as] Leo XIII expressed in succinct and energetic fashion in his Encyclical Letter <i class="calibre5">Divinum Illud</i>: ‘It is sufficient to affirm that if Christ is the Head of the Church, the Holy Spirit is its soul.’</p>
<p class="ntnl">In <i class="calibre5">Lumen Gentium</i> n. 7, the Second Vatican Council reaffirmed Pope Pius XII’s understanding of the Mystical Body of Christ including the notion that the Holy Spirit can be seen as its soul. The Council not only footnotes previous magisterial statements, but also patristic and medieval authors, such as Augustine, John Chrysostom, Didymus of Alexandria, and Thomas Aquinas.</p>
<p class="ntnlf">6  It is by partaking of the Eucharist that Christians come to share most fully in the risen life of Jesus for they eat his risen body and drink his risen blood (see John 6). The Eucharist will be discussed more fully later.</p>
<p class="ntnlf">7  While many today either deny the reality of hell or believe that no one will actually experience it, they hold such errors at their own and others’ peril. Scripture and the Christian tradition both speak of hell as a reality, and while Christians may hope that all are saved, they must perceive it as a reality from which they have been saved and as a reality that they and others, because of unrepented ‘mortal’ sin, could actually experience. See <i class="calibre5">Catechism of the Catholic Church</i>, nn. 1033–37.</p>
<p class="ntnlf">8  This is not the place to articulate a whole theology of evangelization, but its importance should not be neglected. If the Father, the supreme evangelizer, in that, he is the eternal author of his Word, thought it necessary to send his Son into the world in order that humankind might be saved, then the church ought to possess the same mind of the Father with all its urgency. The church, in conformity with the Father’s mind, recognizes that the eternal destiny of his people is at stake.</p>
<p class="ntnl">While it must be affirmed that those who are not Christian can be saved and that other religions do contain ‘seeds’ of truth, yet the reality is that those who have not come to faith in Christ cannot possess the same quality of assurance that the Christian gospel offers.</p>
<p class="ntnl">For Roman Catholic statements on the importance of evangelization see the Second Vatican Council’s <i class="calibre5">Lumen Gentium</i>, nn. 13–17 and <i class="calibre5">Ad Gentes Divinitus;</i> Pope Paul VI’s classic <i class="calibre5">Evangelii Nuntiandi;</i> Pope John Paul II’s <i class="calibre5">Redemptoris Missio;</i> and <i class="calibre5">Catechism of the Catholic Church</i>, nn. 836–59.</p>
<p class="ntnl">Moreover, it should be noted that inherent within a theology of a suffering God is a feeble theology of evangelization. Those who propose that God suffers in himself speak as if this gives consolation to those who suffer. This has been shown to be a deceptive consolation. Moreover, they speak as if everyone, regardless of whether one is a Christian or not, is equally consoled by a suffering God. Thus, there is no urgent need to preach the gospel. But this too is false to the gospel. The Father does wish to console everyone, and that is precisely why he sent his Son into the world. However, the Father can only fully console those who are in union with Christ for Christ is the Father’s consolation. In is only in Christ Jesus that one can come to experience fully the riches of the Father’s mercy (see Eph. 1:3, 2:4–7).</p>
<p class="ntnlf">9  <i class="calibre5">Gaudium et Spes</i>, n. 22.</p>
<p class="ntull">10  <i class="calibre5">Lumen Gentium</i>, n. 48.</p>
<p class="ntull">11  <i class="calibre5">Lumen Gentium</i>, n. 1.</p>
<p class="ntull">12  <i class="calibre5">Lumen Gentium</i>, n. 13. See also <i class="calibre5">Gaudium et Spes</i>, n. 43; <i class="calibre5">Ad Gentes</i>, nn. 7, 21; and Pope John Paul II, <i class="calibre5">Dominum et Vivificantem</i>, nn. 61–64 and <i class="calibre5">Redemptoris Missio</i>, n. 9.2.</p>
<p class="ntull">13  <i class="calibre5">Redemptor Hominis</i>, n. 18.1.</p>
<p class="ntull">14  The third eucharistic prayer of the Catholic church states: ‘Lord, may this sacrifice, which has made our peace with you, advance the peace and salvation of all the world …. In mercy and love unite all your children wherever they may be.’ The fourth eucharistic prayer prays that the Father would ‘Remember those who take part in this offering, those here present and all your people, and all who seek you with a sincere heart.’</p>
<p class="ntnl">It should be noted as well that contemplative religious orders of men and women embody in their vocation the truth of this reality. These men and women live within the confines of their monasteries, and so, normally, do not have a great deal of personal contact with those who suffer outside their walls. Nonetheless, through their prayer, as members of Christ’s body, they are a fount from which Christ pours out great consolation and compassion upon those who suffer.</p>
<p class="ntull">15  Pope John Paul II has stated that the church, ‘as the sacrament of salvation for all mankind … is the sign and promoter of Gospel values.’ Thus the church contributes to ‘mankind’s pilgrimage of conversion to God’s plan through her witness and through such activities as dialogue, human promotion, commitment to justice and peace, education and the care for the sick, and aid to the poor and to children. In carrying on these activities, however, she never loses sight of the priority of the transcendent and spiritual realities which are premises of eschatological salvation.’ <i class="calibre5">Redemptoris Missio</i>, n. 20.4.</p>
<p class="ntull">16  Scholars debate whether or not the above two passages refer solely to the care and love of Christians for one another or to the Christians’ care and love of all. The common traditional interpretation is that Jesus’ words include not just Christians but everyone.</p>
<p class="ntull">17  The most notable and obvious, but by no means exclusive, recent example of this is Mother Theresa of Calcutta’s work with the poor and the dying.</p>
<p class="ntull">18  I must admit that this is a mystery that I am not sure I fully understand, not in the sense of comprehending it, for no Christian mystery can be fully comprehended, but in the sense that I do not even know fully what the mystery is. Nonetheless, I will attempt to articulate as much of this mystery as I presently grasp.</p>
<p class="ntnl">When I say that the risen Christ ‘suffers,’ I do not mean that he physically and emotionally suffers as we do who are not risen. As a risen and glorious man, the Son of God can no longer suffer physically and emotionally in the same sense as we do. However, as risen and glorious, Christ is still a man, and thus still possesses human emotional states, though now in a risen manner. He still possesses the human emotions of joy, compassion and love. He continues to find sin and evil, and the suffering they cause, repugnant. Being in communion with the members of his body, who are not risen, their experiences are his experiences. The manner in which he, as risen, experiences these ‘un-risen’ experiences of his earthly body, I do not know. Thus, I am stating something that I believe has to be the case, but I do not understand the manner or the mode in which it is the case.</p>
<p class="ntnl">It might also be worth noting that it is easier for Christians to know what it means to share in the resurrected life of Christ as being members of his body. The reason being that, through faith and the working of the Holy Spirit, it is <i class="calibre5">their experience</i>. However, it is much more difficult, if not impossible, to grasp fully the risen Christ’s experience of our suffering for that is <i class="calibre5">his experience</i>. My spiritual instinct tells me that the more Christians grow in holiness, and so are able to unite themselves more fully to the sufferings of others, both of Christians and non-Christians alike, the more they will understand how the risen Christ himself suffers. But I am not yet ‘there.’</p>
<p class="ntull">19  <i class="calibre5">Salvifici Doloris</i>, n. 20.</p>
<p class="ntull">20  With reference to this passage Augustine stated:</p>
<p class="bq1f">Christ is now raised above the heavens; but he still experiences on earth whatever sufferings we his members feel. He showed that this is true when he called out from heaven: ‘Saul, Saul, why do you persecute me?’ And: ‘I was thirsty and you gave me drink.’ <i class="calibre5">Sermon on the Ascension</i> taken from <i class="calibre5">The Liturgy of the Hours According to the Roman Rite</i>, Solemnity of the Ascension.</p>
<p class="ntull">21  For an excellent article on these and related passages see M. Hooker, ‘Interchange and Suffering’ in <i class="calibre5">Suffering and Martyrdom in the New Testament</i>, eds W. Horbury and B. McNeil (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1981), pp. 70–83. See also her <i class="calibre5">Not Ashamed of the Gospel</i>.</p>
<p class="ntull">22  See L. Dupré, ‘Jesus Still in Agony?: Meditation on a Negro Spiritual,’ <i class="calibre5">Word and Spirit: A Monastic Review</i> 1 (1979):191–95.</p>
<p class="ntull">23  This is in keeping with the human body analogy. When my stomach is upset, I can say that such is the case, but I also say: ‘I am sick.’ I normally do not say: ‘My stomach is sick.’ It is the human person who is sick and so suffers when one of his or her members is infected or diseased. Similarly, it is Christ himself who suffers when one of his members suffers. He does not say: ‘My body is suffering.’ He says: ‘I am suffering.’ The difference being that in the body of Christ both Christ and his members are persons in themselves, and so both are personally conscious and so suffer as distinct persons in communion with one another.</p>
<p class="ntull">24  I noted in the previous chapter that Jesus, during his earthly life, grew in his love for us, the cross being the attainment of its perfection. I wonder though, in the light of his present suffering in union with his body, if, as a risen man, Christ’s love is not continuing to grow since, as a risen man, he continues to enact deeds of love on our behalf. Heaven may be the experience of the everlasting maturing of Christ’s love for his body and the everlasting maturing of his body’s love for him and one another for all are striving to achieve the perfection of divine love, the depth of which can never be attained.</p>
<p class="ntull">25  Pope John Paul II interprets this passage in a similar fashion.</p>
<p class="bq1f">Thus, with this openness to every human suffering, Christ has accomplished the world’s Redemption through his own suffering. For, at the same time, this Redemption, even though it was completely achieved by Christ’s suffering, lives on and in its own special way develops in the history of man. It lives and develops as the Body of Christ, the Church, and in this dimension every human suffering, by reason of the loving union with Christ, completes the suffering of Christ. It completes that suffering <i class="calibre5">just as the Church completes the redemptive work of Christ</i>. The mystery of the Church – that body which completes in itself also Christ’s crucified and risen body – indicates at the same time the space and context in which human sufferings complete the suffering of Christ. Only within this radius and dimension of the Church as the Body of Christ, which continually develops in space and time, can one think and speak of ‘what is lacking’ in the sufferings of Christ. The Apostle, in fact, makes this clear when he writes of ‘completing what is lacking in Christ’s afflictions for the sake of his body, that is, the Church.’ <i class="calibre5">Salvifici Doloris</i>, n. 24.</p>
<p class="ntnl">A.E. Harvey, in his insightful study <i class="calibre5">Renewal Through Suffering: A Study of 2 Corinthians</i> (Edinburgh: T &amp; T Clark, 1996), argues that Paul’s experience of nearly dying at Ephesus, just prior to his writing 2 Corinthians, radically altered his perception of what it means to suffer in Christ. Moreover, from this experience Paul clearly grasped the spiritual and apostolic benefits that flowed from such suffering. Harvey believes that 2 Corinthians and Paul’s subsequent letters testify to this deeper understanding of Christian suffering.</p>
<p class="bq1f">His [Paul’s] experience of suffering bringing the suffer closer to Christ, causing an inward renewal and spilling over into benefits for others, caused him to write of it as something of positive value in itself; and this, it seems, is without precedent in any Jewish or pagan sources known to us, and is hard to parallel in the revered writing of any other major religion. P. 129.</p>
<p class="ntnl">A.T. Hanson concludes his study on Paul’s notion of suffering by stating: ‘We cannot avoid the conclusion that Paul regarded the sufferings and possible death of the apostles as possessing an atoning, reconciling, salvific value.’ The reason for such a conclusion resides in the truth that ‘all that Paul and his companions did and suffered they did and suffered <i class="calibre5">in Christ.’ The Paradox of the Cross in the Thought of St Paul</i> (Sheffield: JSOT Press, 1987), p. 36. See also pp. 25–37. Similarly, Hanson sees that, within the Pauline theology of the cross, Christians, as the <i class="calibre5">Militia Christi</i>, are waging the same battle as did Christ, and so participate in his same sufferings (see pp. 100–28). (I am grateful to A. Moore for alerting me to the above two studies.)</p>
<p class="ntnl">W.F. Flemington interprets Colossians 1:24 as part of the Pauline theology of being ‘in Christ.’ This is true, but it fails to recognize that to be ‘in Christ’ is to share not merely in Christ’s past sufferings but in his present sufferings. See ‘On the Interpretation of Colossians 1:24’ in <i class="calibre5">Suffering and Martyrdom in the New Testament</i>, pp. 84–90.</p>
<p class="ntull">26  The notion of the Communion of Saints is also significant here. The saints are still living members of the body of Christ. Thus, they are living testimonies of hope for their brothers and sisters who still reside within this world – a world of suffering and tears. Moreover, they are still working members within the body of Christ. Thus, they equally intercede and act on behalf of their ‘earthly’ brothers and sisters. In solidarity with the ‘earthly’ body, they indeed continue to suffer in union with Christ their head. This is why Catholics ‘pray’ to the saints. They realize that the saints are their brothers and sisters, and that they are as much a part of their lives, if not more so, as those on earth. Thus the Saints in heaven are a source of great consolation for the saints on earth.</p>
<p class="ntull">27  <i class="calibre5">Hom. in Leviticum</i>, 7. This and the following two passages are taken from H. de Lubac, <i class="calibre5">Catholicism</i> (San Francisco: Ignatius Press, 1988), pp. 397–407. I am grateful to N. Healy for pointing out these passages.</p>
<p class="ntull">28  <i class="calibre5">Revelation of Divine Love</i>, Chap. 31.</p>
<p class="ntull">29  <i class="calibre5">Ademanni ex scholastico Leodiensi episcopi Brixiensis, de Eucharistae sacramento ad Beregarium epistola</i>.</p>
<p class="ntull">30  <i class="calibre5">Enarrationes in Psalmos</i>, 62, 2.Translation taken from J. Walsh and P.G. Walsh, <i class="calibre5">Divine Providence and Human Suffering</i>, p. 175.</p>
<p class="ntull">31   <i class="calibre5">Salvifici Doloris</i>, n. 24.</p>
<p class="ntull">32  <i class="calibre5">Salvifici Doloris</i>, n. 24.</p>
<p class="ntull">33  <i class="calibre5">Lumen Gentium</i>, n. 11.</p>
<p class="ntull">34  I am not attempting here to present a complete eucharistic theology. I merely want to highlight some aspects of the Eucharist that pertain to what we have already discussed.</p>
<p class="ntull">35  See <i class="calibre5">Catechism of the Catholic Church</i>, nn. 1362–72.</p>
<p class="ntull">36  See <i class="calibre5">Catechism of the Catholic Church</i>, n. 1396.</p>
<p class="ntull">37  See <i class="calibre5">Catechism of the Catholic Church</i>, nn. 1402–5.</p>
<p class="ntull">38  I have unmistakably and purposefully put forward a Roman Catholic understanding of the eucharistic liturgy. I have done so because I believe that only a Catholic understanding, one that the Eastern Orthodox would equally share, can adequately account for the truths that I wished to espouse. Only if Christians are actually united to the one sacrifice of Christ within the liturgy, can Christians give and he embrace their sufferings within his redemptive death. Moreover, only if the bread and wine are genuinely transformed into the risen Christ, so as to allow him to be truly present as he now actually exists in his risen state, can Christians come into full communion with him. Only within the reality of this eucharistic communion can he assume, in the fullest manner possible within this life, the suffering of his body, and his body assume, in the fullest manner possible in this life, the risen life of his glorious body. If Christ is merely symbolically present in the Eucharist, then all of these truths are merely symbolically enacted. The existential consolation and the certain hope contained within the eucharistic liturgy must be founded upon the actual efficacy, and so reality, of the liturgical action.</p>
<p class="ntull">39  Similar to the comment I made that the denial of Christ’s divinity necessarily leads to the embracing of a suffering God, equally, while not every theologian who espouses a suffering God possesses a deficient ecclesiology, many theologians who possess a deficient ecclesiology espouse a suffering God.</p>
<p class="ntull">40  <i class="calibre5">Salvifici Doloris</i>, n. 9.</p>
<p class="ntull">41  It is fashionable in some quarters today to see guilt as psychologically harmful. It represses one’s freedom and self-expression. It is perceived as a remnant of an unenlightened culture or society, or the vestige of a superstitious and oppressive religious formation. Obviously, if a person experiences guilt for no rational reason, it is detrimental to his or her psychological well-being. However, the experience of guilt over sin, within a properly informed conscience, is actually psychologically healthy for it moves one to repentance and to the amending of one’s life. This advances psychological and spiritual maturity. Not to experience guilt over one’s sins is an extremely dangerous state in which to be. It is hazardous not only for oneself, since one does not then realize the moral and psychological damage that one is inflicting upon oneself, but also for others, for it means that one is morally indifferent to the injurious effects that one’s sinful actions have upon others. The person with no moral conscience, who never experiences guilt, is a grave liability to himself and to others.</p>
<p class="ntull">42  The suffering of the Israelites due to their sin often led them to repentance. For example, see Neh. 9:27, 32–37, Ezra 9:6–15, and Dan. 3:26–45. See also Ps. 51 for David’s prayer of repentance. Paul also saw the punishment of excluding the scandalous sinner from the Christian community as a means of leading the person to repentance. See 1 Cor. 5:5, 9–13; 2 Cor. 2:5–11; and 2 Thess. 3:6–15.</p>
<p class="ntull">43  <i class="calibre5">Salvifici Doloris</i>, n. 12.</p>
<p class="ntull">44  It should be noted that it is in this context that the notion of <i class="calibre5">apatheia</i> within the spiritual writings of the Fathers can be properly understood. <i class="calibre5">Apatheia</i> does not pertain to the complete suppression or denial of emotion within the growth to full Christian holiness. Rather <i class="calibre5">apatheia</i> has to do with overcoming the sinful passions and desires. As these are overcome, as the person becomes ‘apathetic’ to sinful passions, the person truly comes alive, with all of one’s heart and mind, to the love of God and neighbour. See L. Bouyer, <i class="calibre5">The Spirituality of the New Testament and the Fathers</i> (New York: The Seabury Press, 1963), pp. 273–75, 297–98, 384–87, 503–6; and <i class="calibre5">From Glory to Glory: Texts from Gregory of Nyssa’s Mystical Writings</i>, ed. and trans. by H. Musurillo, with an Introduction by J. Daniélou (Crestwood: St Vladimir’s Press, 1979), pp. 46–56.</p>
<p class="ntnl">It should also be noted that the possibility of being set free from the suffering of personal sin is another important reason for evangelizing non-Christians. They do not realize that much of their suffering is unnecessary and that, in Christ, as members of his body through the Spirit, they can be released from such suffering.</p>
<p class="ntull">45  <i class="calibre5">Salvifici Doloris</i>, n. 26.</p>
<p class="ntull">46  Paul’s use of athletic imagery follows this same line of thought. The athlete trains and disciplines his body so as to master himself, and thus to be assured of winning the race. See 1 Cor. 9:24–26, Phil. 3:12–14, 1 Tim. 4:7. Paul would give his ardent approval of the jargon among contemporary body-builders: ‘No pain, no gain.’ The Letter to the Hebrews equally exhorts its readers to ‘lay aside every weight, and sin which clings so closely, and let us run with perseverance the race that is set before us.’ Heb. 12:1.</p>
<p class="ntull">47  I do not know whether Michelangelo had Romans 8:22–24 in mind when he carved his ‘unfinished’ statue of ‘The Bound Slave,’ but it is an excellent depiction in stone of this theological truth. Not only is the slave portrayed as struggling to be set free from his bonds, but the slave himself is still partially encased in the marble, and so is equally struggling and groaning to be set free of the marble that still restrains him. Similarly, Christians were slaves to sin and, while set free in Christ, are still groaning to be set free from the sin that still restrains them from obtaining the fulness of their freedom – the glorious image of the new man Christ.</p>
<p class="ntnl">It is interesting to note as well that, as the whole of creation has been affected by humankind’s sin (see Gen. 3:17–18, Rom. 8:20), so Paul saw the whole of creation continuing to groan as it awaits the full redemption of humankind. It too will participate in ‘the glorious liberty of the children of God’ (Rom. 8:21). The ‘natural disasters’ that still afflict humankind, and cause such suffering and devastation, may be theologically interpreted in this context. These are but the whole of creation continuing to groan under the weight of human sin. They will cease when there is a new heaven and new earth. Creation will then be a source of life and abundance, and not a cause of suffering and death (see Hos. 2:23–24, Amos 9:13–15, Is. 65:17, Ezek. 47:6–12, Rev. 21:1, 22:2).</p>
<p class="ntull">48  Job is frequently cited by the Fathers to illustrate how Christians are to experience and interpret suffering. See the references to Job listed in the index of J. Walsh and P.G. Walsh, <i class="calibre5">Divine Providence and Human Suffering</i>.</p>
<p class="ntull">49  It is in the context of God’s discipline that the suffering caused by ‘natural disasters’ might be placed. Losing one’s possessions in a flood or tornado compels one to consider what is of true value. Even the loss of a loved one through a natural disaster necessitates that one consider the precariousness of this life in contrast to the security of eternal life. Natural disasters also bring forth solidarity and generosity in the midst of shared suffering.</p>
<p class="ntnl">Equally, sickness can often be interpreted as part of God’s discipline. Sickness not only alerts us to our own mortality, but also provides the occasion for us to take stock of our lives. It not only provides ‘a pause’ from our often frantic and ill-considered lives in which we can consider the course and meaning of our lives, but it also provides God ‘a pause’ in which he can speak to us about our lives. Sickness and hardship have been the catalyst for deeper conversion in the lives of many saints, for example St Francis of Assisi, St Ignatius of Loyola, and St Teresa of Avila.</p>
<p class="ntull">50  C.H. Talbert, in his excellent little book <i class="calibre5">Learning through Suffering: The Educational Value of Suffering in the New Testament and in its Milieu</i> (Collegeville: The Liturgical Press, 1991), summarizes the meaning of suffering as God’s discipline.</p>
<p class="bq1f">Suffering is the arena in which the Christian can be (1) disciplined, in the sense of training that develops strength; (2) refined, in the sense of the smelting processes’ use of fire to purify precious metal; and (3) educated, in the sense of learning the right way to live. Looked at in this way, suffering and adversity as divine education are not only compatible with God’s loving nature but also inherent in Christian existence in the world. p. 92.</p>
<p class="ntnl">Peter of Blois, in the twelfth century, was the first to write an extended treatise on suffering: <i class="calibre5">The Twelve Advantages to Tribulation</i>. They are: 1. Growth in virtue, 2. Shuts the devil’s mouth, 3. Purges sin, 4. Engenders self-knowledge, 5. Hastens one’s journey to God, 6. Helps pay the debt of sin, 7. Enlarges the heart, 8. Compels one to seek heavenly consolation, 9. Compels God to remember you, 10. Causes prayers to be heard, 11. Guards and nourishes the heart, 12. Evidence of God’s love. For a translation of this treatise see J. Walsh and P.G. Walsh, <i class="calibre5">Divine Providence and Human Suffering</i>, pp. 141–62.</p>
<p class="ntull">51  Without lightly dismissing the evil and suffering caused by the sins of others, it is a form of pride to think that, in the present sinful world, one should be immune from such suffering. While objectively one’s personal integrity should never be violated and while it is morally wrong to have it violated, yet to imagine or assume that one must, therefore, be exempt from experiencing the sins of others or that one should ‘get through life’ unscathed by the sins of others is a display of arrogance. God does not even make himself an exception, nor did Jesus. Self-righteous indignation and pretentious outrage over being offended exemplify such inflated self-importance.</p>
<p class="ntull">52  In his 1984 Post-Synodal Apostolic Exhortation, <i class="calibre5">Reconciliatio et Paenitentia</i>, Pope John Paul II stated that ‘social sin is every sin against the rights of the human person … against other’s freedom … against the dignity and honour of one’s neighbour … against the common good.’ He stated that such sins can be between ‘various human communities’ – economic and cultural groups, or nations and peoples. However, the Pope warns that ‘social sin’ should not be interpreted ‘in the sense that blame for it is to be placed not so much on the moral conscience of an individual, but rather on some vague entity or anonymous collectivity, such as the situation, the system, society, structure, or institution.’ There are situations that are sinful, such as racial discrimination, and structures that are evil, such as slavery; but these are due not to any impersonal entity, but are ‘the accumulation and concentration of many personal sins.’ The impersonal structures or institutions are not responsible even though it may be through them that sin is perpetuated. ‘At the heart of every situation of sin are always to be found sinful people’ (n. 16).</p>
<p class="ntull">53  A major practical problem is that in real-life situations, especially on the personal level, we like to paint situations black and white. One side stands for good, righteousness, and truth (our side), and the other side stands for all that is diabolical. In reality, both sides may have legitimate, though different, concerns. The dilemma is that both sides may be pursuing their cause for truth in a sinful manner. In such situations self-righteousness abounds causing an abundance of suffering on all sides.</p>
<p class="ntull">54  Jesus also made the astounding exhortation:</p>
<p class="bq1f">You have heard that it is said, ‘An eye for an eye and a tooth for a tooth.’ But I say to you, Do not resist one who is evil. But if any one strikes you on the right cheek, turn to him the other also; and if any one would sue you and take your coat, let him have your cloak as well. Mt 5:39–40; see Lk 6:39.</p>
<p class="ntnl">Jesus is not suggesting that Christians should allow evil-doers to ‘walk over’ them, nor is he advocating a social policy that allows criminals to go unchecked and unpunished, but he is stating very dramatically that revenge and mutual recrimination is contrary to the gospel.</p>
<p class="ntull">55  It should also be noted in concluding this section that ‘forgiveness’ is not the same as ‘excusing.’ I excuse someone who accidentally injuries me because the person did not intentionally do so. I forgive someone who injures me and does so knowingly and intentionally. In ‘forgiveness’ I acknowledge the wilful intent of the evil done and strive to ensure that it is not repeated, but I, nonetheless, grant pardon to the offender and strive to hold no bitterness or resentment against him or her.</p>
<p class="ntnl">Moreover, forgiveness is not predicated upon the offender acknowledging his or her guilt and asking forgiveness. Such repentance may make it easier for the person who has been sinned against to forgive, but forgiveness itself is required regardless of whether or not the offender seeks reconciliation.</p>
<p class="ntnl">For an example of my own struggle with forgiveness, see T. Weinandy, ‘Toward Overcoming the Spirit of Resentment in a Polarized Church,’ <i class="calibre5">New Oxford Review</i> 57/9 (1990):14–17. This article has subsequently been republished in eight other periodicals.</p>
<p class="ntnl">Recently psychotherapy has shown interest in forgiveness as a practical means to emotional healing. See R.P. Fitzgibbons, ‘The Cognitive and Emotive Uses of Forgiveness in the Treatment of Anger,’ <i class="calibre5">Psychotherapy</i> 23/4 (1986):629–33.See also R. Enright and R.P. Fitzgibbons, <i class="calibre5">Forgiveness in Psychotherapy: The Path to Resolving Excessive Anger</i> (New York: APA Press, 1999), and the website of the International Forgiveness Institute: <a href="http://www.forgiveness-institute.org" class="calibre3">www.forgiveness-institute.org</a>.</p>
<p class="ntnl">See also S. Wiesenthal, <i class="calibre5">The Sunflower: On the Possibilities and Limits of Forgiveness</i>, revised edition (New York: Schocken Books, 1997). Here Wiesenthal presents an account of his personal confrontation with the question of forgiveness. While imprisoned in a Nazi concentration camp, Wiesenthal was taken to the bedside of a dying member of the SS. The young soldier, overwhelmed by the guilt of his crimes, graphically confesses to Wiesenthal what he has done and asks him, as a Jew, for forgiveness. After listening to and anguishing over what he had heard, Wiesenthal simply departs in silence. At the time and subsequently Wiesenthal questions whether he did what was right. Should he have forgiven the SS soldier? Was it possible for him to forgive? The book contains responses from many leading Jews and Christians to Wiesenthal’s dilemma, many of which are, to my mind, rather superficial. Wiesenthal’s experience tore at the very heart of his being – a Jew, who had suffered despicable humiliations and torments, along with countless fellow Jews, at the hands of the Nazis. Yet, the confession of the soldier equally invoked, deep within him, the question of mercy and forgiveness. I believe Wiesenthal’s silence speaks to both issues. It acknowledges the evil, but it does not say ‘No’ to mercy.</p>
<p class="ntull">56  This could also be the case with ‘natural disasters’ and sickness. Such suffering can release us from our selfish concerns and compel us to respond in generosity and compassion. In the midst of their ‘severe test’ and ‘extreme poverty’ the churches in Macedonia joyfully and liberally contributed to Paul’s collection for the poor in Jerusalem (2 Cor. 8:1–5).</p>
<p class="ntull">57  A. McGill perceptively wrote: ‘The instant a person renounces his self-enclosed identity and repudiates the power of domination as his lord, he provokes the world against him. He stands as an offence to the world, as a fanatic or a fool.’ <i class="calibre5">Suffering: A Test of Theological Method</i>, p. 114.</p>
<p class="ntull">58  As noted earlier, J.-B. Metz denies that there is suffering ‘in God.’ He argues that it is more correct to speak of ‘suffering unto God.’ By this he means the biblical notion, found in such books as the Psalms, Job, and Lamentations, where men and women offer their suffering unto the God of love and righteousness. He refers to this as ‘the mysticism of suffering unto God.’ See ‘Suffering Unto God,’ <i class="calibre5">Critical Inquiry</i>, 20 (1994):611–22 and <i class="calibre5">A Passion for God: The Mystical-Political Dimension of Christianity</i>, pp. 42, 69–71, 116–20.</p>
<p class="ntull">59  All the above passages are from <i class="calibre5">Salvifici Doloris</i>, n. 24.</p>
<p class="ntull">60  <i class="calibre5">Salvifici Doloris</i>, n. 26.</p>
<p class="ntull">61  A. McGill has stated that ‘the Christian can know joy in connection with sorrow, but only because he knows the power of God overcoming the power of evil…. The joy of life in Christ is a consolation for our sorrow as human beings; it does not remove that sorrow.’ <i class="calibre5">Suffering: A Test of Theological Method</i>, pp. 117 and 118.</p>
<p class="ntull">62  <i class="calibre5">Salvifici Doloris</i>, n. 22.</p>
<p class="ntull">63  Obviously, the Old Testament also contains stories and teaching on persecution and martyrdom. See for example Judith, Esther, Daniel 3 and 6, 1 and 2 Maccabees and Jeremiah 11:18–23, 18:18–23, 20:7–18, 26, 36–40.</p>
<p class="ntull">64  For studies on the New Testament teaching concerning persecution and martyrdom, see the relevant essays in <i class="calibre5">Suffering and Martyrdom in the New Testament</i>, especially G.W.H. Lampe, ‘Martyrdom and Inspiration,’ pp. 118–35.</p>
<p class="ntull">65  In the light of today’s moral relativism, Pope John Paul II has eloquently spoken of the need for Christian martyrs who would defend moral truth. ‘Martyrdom, accepted as an affirmation of the inviolability of the moral order, bears splendid witness both to the holiness of God’s law and to the inviolability of the personal dignity of man, created in God’s image and likeness.’ <i class="calibre5">Veritatis Splendor</i>, n. 92.1. See also nn 90–94.</p>
<p class="ntull">66  In the early church this is exemplified most fully in Ignatius of Antioch. See his <i class="calibre5">Letter to the Romans</i>. For other patristic references see J. Walsh and P.G. Walsh, <i class="calibre5">Divine Providence and Human Suffering</i>, pp. 126–31.</p>
<p class="ntull">67  Pope John Paul II has stated that ‘suffering is, in itself, an experience of evil. But Christ has made suffering the firmest basis of the definitive good, namely the good of eternal salvation.’ <i class="calibre5">Salvifici Doloris</i>, n. 26.</p>
<p class="ntnl">The Second Vatican Council declared that all our virtuous deeds – the promotion of ‘the goods of human dignity, familial communion, and freedom, that is to say, all the good fruits of our nature and effort’ – will be found in heaven, ‘but cleaned of all dirt, lit up, and transformed, when Christ gives back to the Father an eternal and universal kingdom.’ <i class="calibre5">Gaudium et Spes</i>, 39.</p>
<p class="ntull">68  The following brief sketch of Edith Stein’s life is based exclusively upon F.M. Oben’s excellent book, <i class="calibre5">Edith Stein: Scholar, Feminist, Saint</i> (New York: Alba House, 1988). For other biographies and studies of Stein, see H. Graef, <i class="calibre5">The Scholar and the Cross</i> (Westminster, MD: The Newman Press, 1955); W. Herbstrith, <i class="calibre5">Edith Stein: A Biography</i> (San Francisco: Ignatius Press, 1992); the small booklet <i class="calibre5">Blessed by the Cross: Five Portraits of Edith Stein</i>, ed. J. Sullivan (New Rochelle: Catholics United for the Faith, 1990); and the short biography that appeared in <i class="calibre5">L’Osservatore Romano</i> at the time of her canonization (No. 41(1562), 14 October 1998).</p>
<p class="ntnl">While all Christian saints and heroes have recognized that they are called to suffer in union with Christ, and have indeed done so, Edith Stein’s death at Auschwitz is particularly relevant here, for, as noted at the outset of this study, the Holocaust has become the experience of this century which has furthered the cause for a passible and so suffering God. One needs only to recall E. Wiesel’s story and Moltmann’s book <i class="calibre5">The Crucified God</i> to perceive the impact that the Holocaust has had upon this issue.</p>
<p class="ntnl">In focusing upon Edith Stein, I do not wish in any way to underestimate or discount the heroism of other Christians. This present century has produced more Christian martyrs than all previous ‘Christian’ centuries combined. This persecution presently continues, and is often ignored. See N. Shea, ‘Atrocities Not Fit to Print,’ <i class="calibre5">First Things</i> 77 (1997):32–35. Nor, indeed, do I want to cheapen the heroic suffering or undervalue the holy lives of the millions of Jews, who were systematically humiliated and brutally killed in the Holocaust. Nor must it be forgotten that there are countless innocent men and women, of every race, nation and religion, who have suffered and died because of hate and injustice.</p>
<p class="ntnl">I have chosen Edith for the obvious reason that she was a Jew by birth and one who remained so as a Christian by faith, and she attempted to respond to the Holocaust in a manner whereby she could be supremely faithful to both. In his homily at her canonization Pope John Paul II called Edith ‘this <i class="calibre5">eminent daughter of Israel and faithful daughter of the Church</i>’ (<i class="calibre5">L’Osservatore Romano</i>, No. 41(1562), 14 October 1998). If the Holocaust is the contemporary icon of suffering, Edith’s life and death may well be the contemporary hermeneutical icon of its interpretation. It is often the lives of saints who best interpret the significance of events, and not the scholarly jottings of historians, philosophers, and theologians.</p>
<p class="ntull">69  See <i class="calibre5">On the Problem of Empathy</i>, trans. W. Stein (The Hague: Martinus Nijhoff, 1964).</p>
<p class="ntull">70  She tells of her experiences as a student in Göttingen in her autobiography, <i class="calibre5">Life in a Jewish Family</i>, trans. J. Koeppel (Washington, DC: ICS Press, 1986), Ch. 7.</p>
<p class="ntull">71  During this time she wrote <i class="calibre5">Finite and Eternal Being, Potency and Act</i>, and contributed an article to the <i class="calibre5">Festschrift</i> honouring E. Husserl entitled: ‘Husserl’s Phenomenology and the Philosophy of St Thomas Aquinas.’ She also translated into German Newman’s <i class="calibre5">Letters and Journals</i> (1801–45), and Aquinas’ <i class="calibre5">De Veritate</i>. See <i class="calibre5">Edith Steins Werke</i>, eds. L. Gelber and R. Leuven (Louvain: E. Nauwelaerts; Freiburg: Herder).</p>
<p class="ntull">72  See her remarkably perceptive essays in <i class="calibre5">Essays on Woman</i>, trans. F.M. Oben (Washington, DC: ICS Press, 1987).</p>
<p class="ntull">73  Oben quotes Teresia de Spiritu Sancto Posselt, <i class="calibre5">Edith Stein</i> (New York: Sheed and Ward, 1952), p. 117.</p>
<p class="ntull">74  <i class="calibre5">The Hidden Life: Essays, Meditations, Spiritual Texts</i>, trans. W. Stein (Washington, DC: ICS Publications, 1992), p. 92.</p>
<p class="ntull">75  Oben quotes Posselt, <i class="calibre5">Edith Stein</i>, p. 212.</p>
<p class="ntull">76  Oben quotes E. Stein, <i class="calibre5">Briefauslese</i> 1917–42 (Freiburg: Herder, 1967), p. 136.</p>
<p class="ntull">77  See <i class="calibre5">The Science of the Cross: A Study of St John of the Cross</i>, trans. H. Graef (Chicago: Henry Regnery, 1960). This work consolidates the spiritual wisdom of Edith, a wisdom that she herself embodied. See also <i class="calibre5">The Hidden Life</i>.</p>
<p class="ntull">78  Oben quotes from Posselt, ch. 7 where she treats Edith’s arrest, imprisonment and death.</p>
<p class="ntull">79  Oben quotes E. Stein, <i class="calibre5">Briefauslese</i>, p. 127.</p>
<p class="ntull">80  Of those whose biographies or works I have read, other known Christians who suffered and died for the faith during this time are the following. Because of his opposition to Nazism, Dietrich Bonhoeffer was imprisoned at Buchenwald and hanged by the Gestapo at Fossenbiirg in 1945. See the bibliography in <i class="calibre5">The Oxford Dictionary of the Christian Church</i>, p. 223. In 1940 Titus Brandsma, OC was appointed by the Dutch bishops to act as a Catholic spokesman against the treatment and deportation of the Jews. He was arrested by the Nazis on 19 January 1942 and killed at Dachau in April. See B. Hanley, <i class="calibre5">Through a Dark Tunnel: The Story of Titus Brandsma</i> (Athlone: Veritas Publications, 1987). Because of his anti-Nazi sympathies Alfred Delp, SJ was tried for treason and executed in the Plotzensee prison in 1945. See <i class="calibre5">The Prison Meditations of Father Delp</i> (New York: Macmillan, 1963). Franz Jägerstätter was a young Catholic married layman who refused active military service within Hitler’s army. He was tried for sedition and treason, and executed in 1943. See E. Putz, <i class="calibre5">Against the Stream: Franz Jägerstätter</i> (London: Pax Christi, 1996). Maximilian Kolbe, OFM, Conv. was arrested and sent to Auschwitz because of his Christian publications. He volunteered to take the place of a young man who was to die by starvation because of an attempted escape. He was killed by lethal injection in 1941. See D.H. Farmer, <i class="calibre5">The Oxford Dictionary of Saints</i> (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1992).</p>
<p class="ntull">81  While, as a Christian, I am particularly drawn to Edith Stein’s response to the Holocaust, there have been numerous, and often conflicting, Jewish and Christian attempts at providing a religious and/or rational interpretation and response to it. The following is the small portion of the existing literature that I have consulted.</p>
<p class="ntnl">For various Jewish responses see: D. Cohn-Sherbok, <i class="calibre5">God and the Holocaust</i> (Leominster: Gracewing, 1996); O. Leaman, <i class="calibre5">Evil and Suffering in Jewish Philosophy</i> (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1995, pp. 185–219; R.L. Rubenstein, <i class="calibre5">After Auschwitz: History, Theology, and Contemporary Judaism</i>, second edition (Baltimore: The Johns Hopkins University Press, 1992), pp. 83–209; N. Solomon, <i class="calibre5">Judaism and World Religion</i> (London: Macmillan, 1991), pp. 173–200.</p>
<p class="ntnl">See also D. B. Batstone, ‘The Transformation of the Messianic Idea in Judaism and Christianity in Light of the Holocaust: Reflection on the Writings of Elie Wiesel,’ <i class="calibre5">Journal of Ecumenical Studies</i> 23/4 (1986):587–600; G. Baum, ‘Theology After Auschwitz’ in <i class="calibre5">The Social Imperative</i> (New York: Paulist Press, 1979), pp. 39–69; D.R. Blumenthal, <i class="calibre5">Facing the Abusing God: A Theology of Protest</i> (Louisville: Westminster/John Knox Press, 1993; A. Cohen, ‘In Our Terrible Age: The <i class="calibre5">Tremendum</i> of the Jews’ in <i class="calibre5">Concilium</i>, vol. 175, <i class="calibre5">The Holocaust as Interpretation</i>, eds D. Tracy and E. Schlüsser Fiorenza, 5 (1984):11–16; S.R. Haynes, ‘Christian Holocaust Theology: A Critical Reassessment’, <i class="calibre5">Journal of American Academy of Religion</i>, 62/2 (1994):553–83; H. Jonas, ‘The Concept of God after Auschwitz: A Jewish Voice,’ <i class="calibre5">The Journal of Religion</i> 67 (1987):1–13; R. Martin, <i class="calibre5">The Suffering of Love</i> (Petersham: St Bede’s Publications, 1995); J.-B. Metz, ‘Christians and Jews after Auschwitz’ in <i class="calibre5">The Emergent Church: The Future of Christianity in a Postbourgeois World</i> (New York: Crossroad, 1981); J.-B. Metz, ‘Facing the Jews, Christian Theology after Auschwitz’ in <i class="calibre5">Concilium</i>, vol. 175/5 (1984):26–33; J.-B. Metz, <i class="calibre5">A Passion for God: The Mystical-Political Dimension of Christianity</i>, especially pp. 121–32; J.F. Moore, ‘A Spectrum of Views: Traditional Christian Responses to the Holocaust,’ <i class="calibre5">Journal of Ecumenical Studies</i> 25/2 (1988):212–24; J. Pawlikowski, ‘The Holocaust and Contemporary Christology,’ in <i class="calibre5">Concilium</i>, vol. 175/5 (1984):43–9.</p>
<p class="ntull">82  At Edith’s beatification in Cologne on 1 May 1987, Pope John Paul II stated:</p>
<p class="ntnl">After she began seeing the destiny of Israel from the standpoint of the Cross, our newly beatified sister let Christ lead her more and more deeply into the mystery of his salvation to be able to bear the multiple pains of humankind in spiritual union with Him and to help atone for the outrageous injustices in the world. As <i class="calibre5">Benedicta a Cruce</i> – Blessed by the Cross – she wanted to bear the cross with Christ for the salvation of her people, her Church and the world as a whole. She offered herself to God as a ‘sacrifice for genuine peace’ and above all for her threatened and humiliated Jewish people. After she recognized that God had once again laid a heavy hand on his people, she was convinced ‘that the destiny of this people was also my destiny.’ Trans. from <i class="calibre5">Blessed by the Cross</i>, p. 34.</p>
</body>
</html>
