<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en-US">
  <head>
    <title>Does God Suffer?</title>
    <link href="../styles/page-template.xpgt" rel="stylesheet" type="application/vnd.adobe-page-template+xml"/>
    <meta content="urn:uuid:e0000000-0000-0000-0000-000004626051" name="Adept.expected.resource"/>
    <meta http-equiv="Content-Type" content="text/html; charset=utf-8"/>
  <link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="../../stylesheet.css"/>
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="../../page_styles.css"/>
</head>
  <body class="calibre">
<p class="ctfm"><a id="page_287" class="calibre2"></a><a href="06_Contents.xhtml#con" id="con" class="calibre2">Conclusion</a></p>
<p class="pn">I believe that little needs to be said by way of concluding this book. I have, as best as I was able, put forth my arguments as clearly and as cogently as possible. In executing this endeavor I have attempted to be faithful to Christian doctrine and to the inherited theological tradition. I did not wish to be enslaved to some past fossilized canon, but rather I wanted to confirm that the authentic Christian tradition not only is alive, but that it could also be applied and actually be employed in an ever-creative and, indeed, ever-new and life-giving manner. It is ultimately the Christian doctrines of the Trinity, of creation, of the Incarnation, of redemption, of the Holy Spirit, and of the church that bear upon the question of human suffering. It is in the proper interpretation and in the accurate understanding of these doctrines that I have sought to bring clarity and understanding to the question of God and human suffering.</p>
<p class="in">Moreover, as I have often reminded the reader, I was not attempting, in taking up the question of God and suffering, to solve a philosophical problem, nor was I attempting to make fully comprehensible a theological mystery. To attempt the first would be to misconceive the task at hand. To attempt the second would be utter folly. Rather, I was merely attempting to articulate more precisely the mystery of God’s relationship to human suffering by clarifying the various Christian mysteries associated with it. In so doing my aim was to allow the glory of these mysteries to shine forth ever more radiantly, and with them then the pure radiance of God’s love for all who suffer. Whether or not I have been successful in all my efforts must now be left to the judgment of each reader.</p>
<p class="in">In conclusion, I merely want to state again that Jesus, as the incarnate Son, who through his death overcame our sin and in his resurrection obtained for us the Spirit of truth and life, is the Father’s merciful and loving response to human suffering. There neither was, nor is there now, nor will there ever be, another. I, as a member of the world’s history of untold human suffering and in communion with all of God’s people, eagerly await that day when Jesus will return in glory to wipe away every tear.</p>
</body>
</html>
