<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en-US">
  <head>
    <title>Does God Suffer?</title>
    <link href="../styles/page-template.xpgt" rel="stylesheet" type="application/vnd.adobe-page-template+xml"/>
    <meta content="urn:uuid:e0000000-0000-0000-0000-000004626051" name="Adept.expected.resource"/>
    <meta http-equiv="Content-Type" content="text/html; charset=utf-8"/>
  <link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="../../stylesheet.css"/>
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="../../page_styles.css"/>
</head>
  <body class="calibre">
<p class="ctfm"><a id="page_288" class="calibre2"></a><a href="06_Contents.xhtml#bib" id="bib" class="calibre2">Bibliography</a></p>
<p class="rfp">For edited works only the editor(s) and title are listed. For specific authors and articles within these works consult the footnotes.</p>
<p class="rf">Anastos, M., ‘Nestorius was Orthodox,’ <i class="calibre5">Dumbarton Oaks Papers</i> 16 (1962):117–40.</p>
<p class="rf">Anderson, J.F., ‘Creation as a Relation,’ <i class="calibre5">The New Scholasticism</i> 24 (1950):263–83.</p>
<p class="rf">Andresen, C., ‘Justine und die mittlere Platonismus,’ <i class="calibre5">Zeitschrift für die neuerstamentliche Wissenschaft</i> 44 (1952–53):157–95.</p>
<p class="rf">Aquinas, T., <i class="calibre5">Summa Theologica</i>, trans. English Dominican Province. New York: Benziger Brothers, 1947.</p>
<p class="rf">—, <i class="calibre5">Summa Contra Gentiles</i> (<i class="calibre5">On the Truth of the Catholic Faith</i>, trans. A. Pegis, V.J. Bourke, J. O’Neil). Garden City: Image Books, 1955–57.</p>
<p class="rf">—, <i class="calibre5">De Ente et Essentia</i> (<i class="calibre5">On Being and Essence</i>, trans. A. Maurer). Toronto: Pontifical Institute of Mediaeval Studies, 1968.</p>
<p class="rf">Armstrong, A.H. (ed.), <i class="calibre5">The Cambridge History of Greek and Early Medieval Philosophy</i>. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1970.</p>
<p class="rf">Attfield, D.G., ‘Can God Be Crucified? A Discussion of J. Moltmann,’ <i class="calibre5">Scottish Journal of Theology</i> 30 (1977):47–56.</p>
<p class="rf">Aulén, G., <i class="calibre5">Christus Victor</i>. London: SPCK, 1931.</p>
<p class="rf">Barnard, L.W., <i class="calibre5">Justin Martyr: His Life and Thought</i>. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1967.</p>
<p class="rf">Bartel, T.W., ‘Why the Philosophical Problems of Chalcedonian Christology Have Not Gone Away,’ <i class="calibre5">Heythrop Journal</i> 36 (1995):153–72.</p>
<p class="rf">Barth, K., <i class="calibre5">Church Dogmatics</i> I/2 and II/I. Edinburgh: T &amp; T Clark, 1957.</p>
<p class="rf">Batstone, D.B., ‘The Transformation of the Messianic Idea in Judaism and Christianity in the Light of the Holocaust: Reflection on the Writings of Elie Wiesel,’ <i class="calibre5">Journal of Ecumenical Studies</i> 23/4 (1986):587–600.</p>
<p class="rf">Bauckham, R., “‘Only the Suffering God Can Help”: Divine Passibility in Modern Theology,’ <i class="calibre5">Themelios</i> 9 (1984:3):6–12.</p>
<p class="rf">—, <i class="calibre5">The Theology of Jürgen Moltmann</i>. Edinburgh: T &amp; T Clark, 1995.</p>
<p class="rf">—, <i class="calibre5">God Crucified: Monotheism and Christology in the New Testament</i>. Carlisle: Paternoster Press, 1998.</p>
<p class="rf">Baum, G., <i class="calibre5">The Social Imperative</i>. New York: Paulist Press, 1979.</p>
<p class="rf">Baxter, A., ‘Chalcedon and the Subject of Christ,’ <i class="calibre5">Downside Review</i> 107 (1989):1–21.</p>
<p class="rf"><a id="page_289" class="calibre3"></a>Bebis, G.B., “‘The Apology” of Nestorius: A New Evaluation,’ <i class="calibre5">Studia Patristica</i> 11 (1972):107–12.</p>
<p class="rf">Bettenson, H., <i class="calibre5">The Early Christian Fathers</i>. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1956.</p>
<p class="rf">Birch, C. (ed.), <i class="calibre5">Liberating Life: Contemporary Approaches to Ecological Theology</i>. Maryknoll: Orbis, 1990.</p>
<p class="rf">Blumenthal, D.R., <i class="calibre5">Facing theAbusing God: A Theology of Protest</i>. Louisville: Westminster/John Knox Press, 1993.</p>
<p class="rf">Boff, L., <i class="calibre5">Passion of Christ, Passion of the World</i>. Maryknoll: Orbis, 1987.</p>
<p class="rf">—, <i class="calibre5">Trinity and Society</i>. Maryknoll: Orbis, 1988.</p>
<p class="rf">Bonhoeffer, D., <i class="calibre5">Letters and Papers from Prison</i>. London: SCM, 1967.</p>
<p class="rf">Botterwick, G.J. and H. Ringgren (eds), <i class="calibre5">The Theological Dictionary of the Old Testament</i>. Grand Rapids: Eerdmans, 1986.</p>
<p class="rf">Bouyer, L., <i class="calibre5">The Spirituality of the New Testament and the Fathers</i>. New York: Seabury Press, 1963.</p>
<p class="rf">Bracken, J.A., and M.H. Suchocki (eds), <i class="calibre5">Trinity in Process: A Relational Theology of God</i>. New York: Continuum, 1997.</p>
<p class="rf">Bradshaw, D. “‘All Existing is the Action of God”: The Philosophical Theology of David Braine,’ <i class="calibre5">The Thomist</i> 60/3 (1996): 379–416.</p>
<p class="rf">Braine, D., <i class="calibre5">The Reality of Time and the Existence of God</i>. Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1988.</p>
<p class="rf">Brasnett, B.R., <i class="calibre5">The Suffering of the Impassible God</i>. London: SPCK, 1928.</p>
<p class="rf">Brigg, C., <i class="calibre5">The Christian Platonists of Alexandria</i>. Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1913.</p>
<p class="rf">Brinkmann, B.R., <i class="calibre5">To the Lengths of God</i>. London: Sheed &amp; Ward, 1988.</p>
<p class="rf">Brown, R.E., <i class="calibre5">An Introduction to New Testament Christology</i>. New York: Paulist Press, 1994.</p>
<p class="rf">Bulgakov, S., <i class="calibre5">Agniec Bozij</i>. Paris: YMCA Press, 1933. French edition: <i class="calibre5">Du Verbe Incarné</i>. Paris: Aubier, 1943.</p>
<p class="rf">Burnley, E., ‘The Impassibility of God,’ <i class="calibre5">The Expository Times</i> 67 (1955–56):90–1.</p>
<p class="rf">Burrell, D., <i class="calibre5">Aquinas: God and Action</i>. London: Routledge &amp; Kegan Paul, 1979.</p>
<p class="rf">—, ‘Does Process Theology Rest on a Mistake?’ <i class="calibre5">Theological Studies</i> 43 (1982):125–35.</p>
<p class="rf">—, <i class="calibre5">Knowing the Unknowable God</i>. Notre Dame: University Press of Notre Dame, 1986.</p>
<p class="rf">—, <i class="calibre5">Freedom and Creation in Three Traditions</i>. Notre Dame: University of Notre Dame Press, 1993.</p>
<p class="rf">—, ‘Incarnation and Creation: The Hidden Dimension,’ <i class="calibre5">Modern Theology</i> 12/2 (1996):211–20.</p>
<p class="rf">Burrell, D. and B. McGinn (eds), <i class="calibre5">God and Creation: An Ecumenical Symposium</i>. Notre Dame: University of Notre Dame Press, 1990.</p>
<p class="rf">Cain, C., ‘A Passionate God,’ <i class="calibre5">St Luke’s Journal of Theology</i> 25 (1981):52–57.</p>
<p class="rf">Calvin, J., <i class="calibre5">Institutes of the Christian Religion</i>. London: James Clarke Ltd, 1957.</p>
<p class="rf">Cantalamessa, R., <i class="calibre5">La Cristologia di Tertulliano</i> (Paradosis 18). Fribourg, 1962.</p>
<p class="rf">—, <i class="calibre5">The Power of the Cross</i>. London: Darton, Longman &amp; Todd, 1996.</p>
<p class="rf"><a id="page_290" class="calibre3"></a>Cargas, H.J. and B. Lee (eds), <i class="calibre5">Religious Experience and Process Theology</i>. New York: Paulist Press, 1976.</p>
<p class="rf"><i class="calibre5">Catechism of the Catholic Church</i>. New York: Catholic Book Publishing Co., 1994.</p>
<p class="rf">Cessario, R., <i class="calibre5">The Godly Image: Christ and Salvation in Catholic Thought from Anselm to Aquinas</i>. Petersham: St Bede’s Publications, 1990.</p>
<p class="rf">Chadwick, H., ‘Eucharist and Christology in the Nestorian Controversy,’ <i class="calibre5">Journal of Theological Studies</i> 2 (1951):145–64.</p>
<p class="rf">Chestnut, R., ‘The Two Prosopa in Nestorius’ <i class="calibre5">Bazaar of Heracleides,’ Journal of Theological Studies</i> NS 29/2 (1978):393–409.</p>
<p class="rf">Childs, B.S., <i class="calibre5">Old Testament Theology in a Canonical Context</i>. London: SCM, 1985.</p>
<p class="rf">Clark, K.J. (ed.) <i class="calibre5">Our Knowledge of God</i>. Dordrecht: Klwer Academic Press, 1992.</p>
<p class="rf">Clark, S.B., <i class="calibre5">Redeemer</i>. Ann Arbor: Servant Publications, 1992.</p>
<p class="rf">Clarke, B.L. and E.T. Long (eds), <i class="calibre5">God and Temporality</i>. New York: Paragon House, 1984.</p>
<p class="rf">Clarke, W.N., <i class="calibre5">The Philosophical Approach to God: A Neo-Thomistic Perspective</i>. Winston-Salem: Wake Forest University Press, 1979.</p>
<p class="rf">Clément, O., <i class="calibre5">The Roots of Christian Mysticism</i>. London: New City, 1993.</p>
<p class="rf">Cobb, J.B., <i class="calibre5">A Christian Natural Theology</i>. London: Lutterworth Press, 1966.</p>
<p class="rf">Cobb, J.B. and D. Griffin (eds), <i class="calibre5">Process Thought: An Introductory Exposition</i>. Philadelphia: Westminster Press, 1976.</p>
<p class="rf">Cohn-Sherbok, D., <i class="calibre5">God and the Holocaust</i>. Leominster: Gracewing, 1996.</p>
<p class="rf">Cone, J., <i class="calibre5">God of the Oppressed</i>. London: SPCK, 1977.</p>
<p class="rf">Congar, Y., <i class="calibre5">The Word and the Spirit</i>. London: Geoffrey Chapman, 1986.</p>
<p class="rf">Copleston, F., <i class="calibre5">The History of Philosophy</i>, Vol. 1. New York: Doubleday, 1962.</p>
<p class="rf">Cousins, E.H. (ed.), <i class="calibre5">Process Theology</i>. New York: Paulist Press, 1971.</p>
<p class="rf">Creel, R., <i class="calibre5">Divine Impassibility</i>. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1986.</p>
<p class="rf">Cross, R., ‘Aquinas on Nature, Hypostasis, and the Metaphysics of the Incarnation,’ <i class="calibre5">The Thomist</i> 60/2 (1996):171–202.</p>
<p class="rf">Crouzel, H., ‘La Passion de L’Impassible: Un essai apologétique et polémique du III siècle,’ <i class="calibre5">L’Homme Devant Dieu: Mèlanges Offerts au Père Henri de Lubac</i>. Paris: Aubier, 1963.</p>
<p class="rf">—, <i class="calibre5">Origen</i>. Edinburgh: T &amp; T Clark, 1989.</p>
<p class="rf">Culpepper, R., <i class="calibre5">Interpreting the Atonement</i>. Grand Rapids: Eerdmans, 1966.</p>
<p class="rf">Cyril of Alexandria, <i class="calibre5">On the Incarnation Against Nestorius</i>. Oxford: James Parker &amp; Co., 1881.</p>
<p class="rf">—, <i class="calibre5">Selected Letters</i> (ed. and trans. L.R. Wickham). Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1983.</p>
<p class="rf">—, <i class="calibre5">On the Unity of Christ</i> (trans. J. McGuckin). Crestwood: St Vladimir’s Press, 1995.</p>
<p class="rf">Daniélou, J., <i class="calibre5">Gospel Message and Hellenistic Culture</i>, Vol. 2. London: Darton, Longman &amp; Todd, 1973.</p>
<p class="rf">—, <i class="calibre5">Origen</i>. London: Sheed &amp; Ward, 1995.</p>
<p class="rf">Davies, B., <i class="calibre5">Thinking About God</i>. London: Geoffrey Chapman, 1985.</p>
<p class="rf">—, <i class="calibre5">The Thought of Thomas Aquinas</i>. Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1992.</p>
<p class="rf"><a id="page_291" class="calibre3"></a>de Lubac, H., <i class="calibre5">Catholicism</i>. San Francisco: Ignatius Press, 1988.</p>
<p class="rf">de Margerie, B., <i class="calibre5">The Christian Trinity in History</i>. Petersham: St Bede’s Publications, 1981.</p>
<p class="rf">—, ‘De la Souffrance de Dieu?’ <i class="calibre5">Esprit et Vie</i> 93 (1983):110–12.</p>
<p class="rf">Denzinger, H. and A. Schonmetzer (eds), <i class="calibre5">Enchiridion Symbolorum</i>, 36th edition. Fribourg: Herder, 1976.</p>
<p class="rf">de S. Cameron, N.M. (ed.), <i class="calibre5">The Power and the Weakness of God</i>. Edinburgh: Rutherford House Books, 1990.</p>
<p class="rf">di Berardino, A. (ed.), <i class="calibre5">Encyclopedia of the Early Church</i>. Cambridge: James Clarke &amp; Co., 1992.</p>
<p class="rf">Dillistone, F.W., <i class="calibre5">The Christian Understanding of the Atonement</i>. London: James Nisbet, 1968.</p>
<p class="rf">Dillon, J., <i class="calibre5">The Middle Platonists: A Study of Platonism 80 BC–AD</i> 220. London: Duckworth, 1977.</p>
<p class="rf">Dodds, M., <i class="calibre5">The Unchanging God of Love</i>. Fribourg: Editions Universitaires Fribourg Suisse, 1985.</p>
<p class="rf">—, ‘St Thomas Aquinas and the Motion of the Motionless God,’ <i class="calibre5">New Blackfriars</i> 86 (1987):233–42.</p>
<p class="rf">—, ‘Thomas Aquinas, Human Suffering, and the Unchanging God of Love,’ <i class="calibre5">Theological Studies</i> 52 (1991):330–44.</p>
<p class="rf">Dorner, I.A., <i class="calibre5">Divine Immutability: A Critical Reconsideration</i>. Minneapolis: Fortress Press, 1994.</p>
<p class="rf">Dunn, J.D.G., <i class="calibre5">Christology in the Making</i>. Philadelphia: Westminster Press, 1980.</p>
<p class="rf">Dupré, L., ‘Jesus Still in Agony?: Meditation on a Negro Spiritual,’ <i class="calibre5">Word and Spirit: A Monastic Review</i> 1 (1979):191–95.</p>
<p class="rf">Edwards, M., ‘On the Platonic Schooling of Justin Martyr,’ <i class="calibre5">Journal of Theological Studies</i> 42 (1991):17–34.</p>
<p class="rf">—, ‘Justin’s Logos and the Word of God,’ <i class="calibre5">Journal of Early Christian Studies</i> 3/3 (1995):261–80.</p>
<p class="rf">Edwards, R.M., ‘The Pagan Dogma of the Absolute Unchangeableness of God,’ <i class="calibre5">Religious Studies</i> 14 (1978):305–13.</p>
<p class="rf">Enright, R. and R.P. Fitzgibbons, <i class="calibre5">Forgiveness in Psychotherapy: The Path to Resolving Excessive Anger</i>. New York: APA Press, 1999.</p>
<p class="rf">Evans, E. (ed. and trans.), <i class="calibre5">Tertullian’s Treatise on the Incarnation</i>. London: SPCK, 1956.</p>
<p class="rf">Fairbairn, A.M., <i class="calibre5">The Place of Christ in Modern Theology</i>. New York: Charles Scribner’s Sons, 1893.</p>
<p class="rf">Farrow, D.B., ‘Review Essay: In the End Is the Beginning: A Review of Jürgen Moltmann’s Systematic Contributions,’ <i class="calibre5">Modern Theology</i> 14/3 (1998):425–47.</p>
<p class="rf">Ferguson, E. (ed.), <i class="calibre5">Encyclopedia of Early Christianity</i>. London: Garland Publishing, 1990.</p>
<p class="rf">Fiddes, P., <i class="calibre5">Past Event, Present Salvation: The Christian Idea of Atonement</i>. London: Darton, Longman &amp; Todd, 1989.</p>
<p class="rf">—, <i class="calibre5">The Creative Suffering of God</i>. Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1990.</p>
<p class="rf">Fitzgibbons, R.P., ‘The Cognitive and Emotive Uses of Forgiveness in the Treatment of Anger,’ <i class="calibre5">Psychotherapy</i> 23/4 (1986):629–33.</p>
<p class="rf">Frankenberry, N., ‘Some Problems in Process Theodicy,’ <i class="calibre5">Religious Studies</i> 17 (1981):179–97.</p>
<p class="rf"><a id="page_292" class="calibre3"></a>Fretheim, T.E., <i class="calibre5">The Suffering of God: An Old Testament Perspective</i>. Philadelphia: Fortress Press, 1984.</p>
<p class="rf">—, ‘Divine Foreknowledge, Divine Constancy and the Rejection of Saul’s Kingship,’ <i class="calibre5">Catholic Biblical Quarterly</i> 47 (1985):595–602.</p>
<p class="rf">—, ‘The Repentance of God: A Study of Jeremiah 18:7–10,’ <i class="calibre5">Hebrew Annual Review</i> 11 (1987):81–92.</p>
<p class="rf">—, ‘The Repentance of God: A Key to Evaluating Old Testament God-Talk,’ <i class="calibre5">Horizons in Biblical Theology</i> 10 (1988):47–70.</p>
<p class="rf">—, ‘Suffering God and Sovereign God in Exodus,’ <i class="calibre5">Horizons in Biblical Theology</i> 11 (1989):31–56.</p>
<p class="rf">Friedman, D.N. (ed.), <i class="calibre5">The Anchor Bible Dictionary</i>. New York: Doubleday, 1992.</p>
<p class="rf">Fries P. and T. Nersoyan (eds), <i class="calibre5">Christ in East and West</i>. Macon: Mercer Press, 1987.</p>
<p class="rf">Galot, J., <i class="calibre5">La Conscience de Jésus</i>. Paris: Duculot-Lethielleux, 1971.</p>
<p class="rf">—, <i class="calibre5">Vers une Nouvelle Christologie</i>. Paris: Ducolot-Lethielleux, 1971.</p>
<p class="rf">—, <i class="calibre5">Dieu Souffre-t-il?</i> Paris: Editions P. Lethielleux, 1976.</p>
<p class="rf">—, ‘La Réalité de la Souffrance de Dieu,’ <i class="calibre5">Nouvelle Revue Theologique</i> 101 (1979):224–45.</p>
<p class="rf">—, ‘La Révélation de la Souffrance de Dieu,’ <i class="calibre5">Science et Esprit</i> 31 (1979):159–71.</p>
<p class="rf">—, <i class="calibre5">Who is Christ?</i> Chicago: Franciscan Herald Press, 1981.</p>
<p class="rf">—, ‘Le Dieu Trinitaire et la Passion du Christ,’ <i class="calibre5">Nouvelle Revue Theologique</i> 104 (1982):70–87.</p>
<p class="rf">—, <i class="calibre5">The Person of Christ</i>. Chicago: Franciscan Herald Press, 1983.</p>
<p class="rf">—, ‘Le Mystère de la Souffrance de Dieu,’ <i class="calibre5">Esprit et Vie</i> 100 (1990):261–68.</p>
<p class="rf">—, <i class="calibre5">Abba, Father</i>. New York: Alba House, 1992.</p>
<p class="rf">—, <i class="calibre5">Père, qui es-Tu?</i> Versailles: Éditions Saint-Paul, 1996.</p>
<p class="rf">—, <i class="calibre5">Notre Père qui est Amour</i>. Saint-Maur: Parole et Silence, 1998.</p>
<p class="rf">Geach, P.T., ‘God’s Relation to the World,’ <i class="calibre5">Sophia</i> 8/2 (1969):1–4.</p>
<p class="rf">Gervais, M., ‘Incarnation et Immutabilité Divine,’ <i class="calibre5">Revue des Sciences Religieuses</i> 50 (1976):215–43.</p>
<p class="rf">Gestrich, C., <i class="calibre5">The Return of Splendor in the World: The Christian Doctrine of Sin and Forgiveness</i>. Grand Rapids: Eerdmans, 1997.</p>
<p class="rf">Gillet, L., ‘Le Dieu Souffrant,’ <i class="calibre5">Contacts</i> 17 (1965):239–54.</p>
<p class="rf">Gillon, L.B., ‘Dieu Immobile et Dieu en Mouvement,’ <i class="calibre5">Doctor Communis</i> 29 (1976):135–45.</p>
<p class="rf">Gilson, E., <i class="calibre5">The Spirit of Mediaeval Philosophy</i>. London: Sheed &amp; Ward, 1936.</p>
<p class="rf">—, <i class="calibre5">God and Philosophy</i>. New Haven: Yale University Press, 1941.</p>
<p class="rf">—, <i class="calibre5">The Christian Philosophy of St Thomas Aquinas</i>. London: Gollancz, 1957.</p>
<p class="rf">Goetz, R., ‘The Suffering God: The Rise of a New Orthodoxy,’ <i class="calibre5">The Christian Century</i> 103/13 (1986):385–89.</p>
<p class="rf">Goitein, S.D., ‘YHWH The Passionate: The Monotheistic Meaning and Origin of the Name YHWH,’ <i class="calibre5">Vetus Testamentum</i> 6 (1956):1–9.</p>
<p class="rf">Goodenough, E.R., <i class="calibre5">An Introduction to Philo Judaeus</i>. Oxford: Basil Blackwell, 1962.</p>
<p class="rf">—, <i class="calibre5">The Theology of Justin Martyr</i>. Amsterdam: Philo Press, 1968.</p>
<p class="rf">Gould, G., ‘Cyril of Alexandria and the Formula of Reunion,’ <i class="calibre5">Downside Review</i> 106 (1988):238–43.</p>
<p class="rf"><a id="page_293" class="calibre3"></a>Graef, H., <i class="calibre5">The Scholar and the Cross</i>. Westminster: The Newman Press, 1955.</p>
<p class="rf">Grant, C., ‘Possibilities for Divine Passibility,’ <i class="calibre5">Toronto Journal of Theology</i> 4/1 (1988):8–14.</p>
<p class="rf">Grant, R., <i class="calibre5">The Early Christian Doctrine of God</i>. Charlottesville: University Press of Virginia, 1966.</p>
<p class="rf">—, <i class="calibre5">Greek Apologists of the Second Century</i>. Philadelphia: Westminster Press, 1988.</p>
<p class="rf">Griffin, D., <i class="calibre5">A Process Christology</i>. Philadelphia; Westminster Press, 1973.</p>
<p class="rf">—, ‘The Possibility of Subjective Immortality in Whitehead’s Philosophy,’ <i class="calibre5">The Modern Schoolman</i> 53 (1975):39–57.</p>
<p class="rf">—, <i class="calibre5">God, Power, and Evil</i>. Lanham: University of America Press, 1991.</p>
<p class="rf">Grillmeier, A., <i class="calibre5">Christ in Christian Tradition</i>, Vol. 1. London: Mowbrays, 1975.</p>
<p class="rf">Grisez, G., <i class="calibre5">Beyond the New Theism</i>. Notre Dame: University Press of Notre Dame, 1975.</p>
<p class="rf">Groves, P., <i class="calibre5">Ineffability and Divine Impassibility</i>. Oxford: D.Phil. dissertation, 1995.</p>
<p class="rf">Gunton, C., ‘Process Theology’s Concept of God,’ <i class="calibre5">The Expository Times</i> 84 (1972–73):294–96.</p>
<p class="rf">—, <i class="calibre5">The One, the Three and the Many</i>. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1993.</p>
<p class="rf">Gunton, C. (ed.), <i class="calibre5">The Cambridge Companion to Christian Doctrine</i>. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1997.</p>
<p class="rf">Guroian, V., ‘The Suffering God of Armenian Christology: Towards an Ecumenical Theology of the Cross,’ <i class="calibre5">Dialog</i> 32/2 (1993):97–101.</p>
<p class="rf">Gutiérrez, G., <i class="calibre5">On Job, God-Talk and the Suffering of the Innocent</i>. Maryknoll: Orbis, 1987.</p>
<p class="rf">Haight, R., ‘The Case for Spirit Christology,’ <i class="calibre5">Theological Studies</i> 53 (1992):257–87.</p>
<p class="rf">Hall, D.J., <i class="calibre5">God and Human Suffering: An Exercise in the Theology of the Cross</i>. Minneapolis: Augsburg, 1986.</p>
<p class="rf">Hall, S.G., <i class="calibre5">Doctrine and Practice in the Early Church</i>. London: SPCK, 1991.</p>
<p class="rf">Hallman, J., ‘The Mutability of God: Tertullian to Lactantius,’ <i class="calibre5">Theological Studies</i> 42 (1981):373–93.</p>
<p class="rf">—, ‘Divine Suffering and Change in Origen and <i class="calibre5">Ad Theopompum,’ The Second Century</i> 7 (1989–90):85–98.</p>
<p class="rf">—, <i class="calibre5">The Descent of God: Divine Suffering in History and Theology</i>. Minneapolis: Fortress Press, 1991.</p>
<p class="rf">—, ‘The Seed of Fire: Suffering in the Christology of Cyril of Alexandria and Nestorius of Constantinople,’ <i class="calibre5">Early Christian Studies</i> 5/3 (1997):369–91.</p>
<p class="rf">Hanson, A.T., <i class="calibre5">The Paradox of the Cross in the Thought of St Paul</i>. Sheffield: JSOT Press, 1987.</p>
<p class="rf">Hart, T. and D. Thimell (eds), <i class="calibre5">Christ in Our Place</i>. Exeter: Paternoster Press, 1987.</p>
<p class="rf">Hartshorne, C., <i class="calibre5">The Divine Relativity</i>. New Haven: Yale University Press, 1948.</p>
<p class="rf">—, <i class="calibre5">Man’s Vision of God and the Logic of Theism</i>. Hamden: Archon Books, 1964.</p>
<p class="rf"><a id="page_294" class="calibre3"></a>Harvey, A.E., <i class="calibre5">Renewal through Suffering: A Study of 2 Corinthians</i>. Edinburgh: T &amp; T Clark, 1996.</p>
<p class="rf">Haughton, R., <i class="calibre5">The Passionate God</i>. New York: Paulist Press, 1981.</p>
<p class="rf">Haynes, S.R., ‘Christian Holocaust Theology: A Critical Reassessment,’ <i class="calibre5">Journal of the American Academy of Religion</i> 62/2 (1994):553–83.</p>
<p class="rf">Hebblethwaite, B. and E. Henderson (eds), <i class="calibre5">Divine Action</i>. Edinburgh: T &amp; T Clark, 1990.</p>
<p class="rf">Hefling, C.C., ‘Reviving Adamic Adoptionism: The Example of John Macquarrie,’ <i class="calibre5">Theological Studies</i> 52 (1991):476–94.</p>
<p class="rf">Hellwig, M., <i class="calibre5">Jesus, the Compassion of God: New Perspectives on the Tradition of Christianity</i>. Wilmington: Michael Glazier, 1983.</p>
<p class="rf">Helm, P., <i class="calibre5">Eternal God: A Study of God Without Time</i>. Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1988.</p>
<p class="rf">Hengel, M., <i class="calibre5">The Atonement: A Study of the Origin of the Doctrine in the New Testament</i>. London: SCM, 1981.</p>
<p class="rf">—, <i class="calibre5">The Cross of the Son</i>. London: SCM, 1986.</p>
<p class="rf">Henninger, M., <i class="calibre5">Relations: Medieval Theories</i> 1250–1325. Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1989.</p>
<p class="rf">Henry, M., <i class="calibre5">On Not Understanding God</i>. Dublin: The Columba Press, 1997.</p>
<p class="rf">Herbstrith, W., <i class="calibre5">Edith Stein: A Biography</i>. San Francisco: Ignatius Press, 1992.</p>
<p class="rf">Heron, A., <i class="calibre5">The Holy Spirit</i>. Philadelphia: Westminster Press, 1983.</p>
<p class="rf">Heschel, A., <i class="calibre5">The Prophets</i>. New York: Harper &amp; Row, 1962.</p>
<p class="rf">Hill, W., ‘Does the World Make a Difference to God?’ <i class="calibre5">The Thomist</i> 38 (1974):146–64.</p>
<p class="rf">—, ‘Does God Know the Future? Aquinas and Some Moderns,’ <i class="calibre5">Theological Studies</i> 36 (1975):3–18.</p>
<p class="rf">—, ‘In What Sense is God Infinite? A Thomistic Perspective,’ <i class="calibre5">The Thomist</i> 42 (1978):14–27.</p>
<p class="rf">—, ‘Two Gods of Love: Aquinas and Whitehead,’ <i class="calibre5">Listening</i> 14 (1979):249–64.</p>
<p class="rf">—, <i class="calibre5">The Three-Personed God</i>. Washington, DC: Catholic University of America Press, 1982.</p>
<p class="rf">—, ‘The Historicity of God,’ <i class="calibre5">Theological Studies</i> 45 (1984):320–33.</p>
<p class="rf">Holte, R., ‘Spermatikos Logos,’ <i class="calibre5">Studia Theologica</i> 12 (1958):109–68.</p>
<p class="rf">Hooker, M., <i class="calibre5">Not Ashamed of the Gospel: New Testament Interpretation of the Death of Christ</i>. Carlisle: The Paternoster Press, 1994.</p>
<p class="rf">Horbury, W. and B. McNeil (eds), <i class="calibre5">Suffering and Martyrdom in the New Testament</i>. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1981.</p>
<p class="rf">House, F., ‘The Barrier of Impassibility,’ <i class="calibre5">Theology</i> 83 (1980):409–15.</p>
<p class="rf">Hryniewicz, W., ‘Le Dieu Souffrant?: Réflexions sur la notion chrétienne de Dieu,’ <i class="calibre5">Eglise et Théologie</i> 12 (1981):33–56.</p>
<p class="rf">Imhof, P. and H. Biallowons (eds), <i class="calibre5">Karl Rahner in Dialogue: Conversations and Interviews 1965–1982</i>. New York: Crossroad, 1986.</p>
<p class="rf">Jacob, E., ‘Le Dieu Souffrant, un Thème Théologique Vétérotestamentaire,’ <i class="calibre5">Zeitshrift für die Alttestamentliche Wissenschaft</i> 95 (1983): 1–8.</p>
<p class="rf">Jantzen, G., <i class="calibre5">God’s World, God’s Body</i>. London: Darton, Longman &amp; Todd, 1984.</p>
<p class="rf">Jenkins, D.E., <i class="calibre5">Still Living with Questions</i>. London: SCM, 1990.</p>
<p class="rf"><a id="page_295" class="calibre3"></a>Jenson, R.W., <i class="calibre5">Systematic Theology</i>, Volume 1: <i class="calibre5">The Triune God</i>. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1997.</p>
<p class="rf">John Paul II, <i class="calibre5">Salvifici Doloris</i> (1984).</p>
<p class="rf">—, <i class="calibre5">Reconciliatio et Paenitentia</i> (1984).</p>
<p class="rf">—, <i class="calibre5">Dominum et Vivificantem</i> (1986).</p>
<p class="rf">—, <i class="calibre5">Redemptoris Missio</i> (1990).</p>
<p class="rf">—, <i class="calibre5">Veritatis Splendor</i> (1993).</p>
<p class="rf">—, <i class="calibre5">Fides et Ratio</i> (1998).</p>
<p class="rf">Johnson, E., <i class="calibre5">She Who Is</i>. New York: Crossroad, 1993.</p>
<p class="rf">Jonas, H., ‘The Concept of God After Auschwitz: A Jewish Voice,’ <i class="calibre5">The Journal of Religion</i> 67 (1987):1–13.</p>
<p class="rf">Jüngel, E., <i class="calibre5">The Doctrine of the Trinity: God’s Being is in Becoming</i>. Grand Rapids: Eerdmans, 1976.</p>
<p class="rf">—, <i class="calibre5">God as the Mystery of the World: On the Foundation of the Theology of the Crucified One in the Dispute Between Theism and Atheism</i>. Edinburgh: T &amp; T Clark, 1983.</p>
<p class="rf">—, <i class="calibre5">Theological Essays</i>. Edinburgh: T &amp; T Clark, 1989.</p>
<p class="rf">Kamp, J., ‘Présence du Dieu Souffrant,’ <i class="calibre5">Lumiére et Vie</i> 25 (1976):54–66.</p>
<p class="rf">Kantzer, K. and S. Gundry (eds), <i class="calibre5">Perspectives on Evangelical Theology</i>. Grand Rapids: Baker, 1979.</p>
<p class="rf">Kasper, W., <i class="calibre5">Jesus the Christ</i>. London: Burns &amp; Oates, 1975.</p>
<p class="rf">—, <i class="calibre5">The God of Jesus Christ</i>. New York: Crossroad, 1984.</p>
<p class="rf">Kehl, M. and W. Loser (eds), <i class="calibre5">The Von Balthasar Reader</i>. New York: Crossroad, 1982.</p>
<p class="rf">Kelly, A.J., ‘God: How Near a Relation?’ <i class="calibre5">The Thomist</i> 34 (1970):191–229.</p>
<p class="rf">—, ‘Trinity and Process: Relevance of the Basic Christian Confession of God,’ <i class="calibre5">Theological Studies</i> 13 (1970):393–414.</p>
<p class="rf">Kelly, J.N.D., <i class="calibre5">Early Christian Doctrines</i>. London: Adam &amp; Charles Black, 1968.</p>
<p class="rf">Kereszty, R.A., <i class="calibre5">Jesus Christ: Fundamentals of Christology</i>. New York: Alba House, 1991.</p>
<p class="rf">Kirn, A.G. (ed.), <i class="calibre5">Selected Papers</i>. Toronto: Pontifical Institute of Mediaeval Studies, 1967.</p>
<p class="rf">Kitamori, K., <i class="calibre5">Theology of the Pain of God</i>. London: SCM, 1966.</p>
<p class="rf">Kittel, G. (ed.), <i class="calibre5">Theological Dictionary of the New Testament</i>. Grand Rapids: Eerdmans, 1965.</p>
<p class="rf">Kolakowski, L., <i class="calibre5">Metaphysical Horror</i>. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1988.</p>
<p class="rf">Kondoleon, T.J., ‘The Immutability of God: Some Recent Challenges,’ <i class="calibre5">The New Scholasticism</i> 58/3 (1984):293–315.</p>
<p class="rf">Krempel, A., <i class="calibre5">La Doctrine de la Relation chez Saint Thomas</i>. Paris: J. Vrin, 1952.</p>
<p class="rf">Krenski, T.R., <i class="calibre5">Passio Caritatis. Trinitarische Passiologie im Werk Hans Urs von Balthasar</i>. Freiburg: Johannes Verlag, 1990.</p>
<p class="rf">Kretzmann, N., <i class="calibre5">The Metaphysics of Theism: Aquinas’s Natural Theology in Summa Contra Gentiles I</i>. Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1997.</p>
<p class="rf">Küng, H., <i class="calibre5">The Incarnation of God</i>. New York: Crossroad, 1987.</p>
<p class="rf">Kuyper, L.J., ‘The Suffering and the Repentance of God,’ <i class="calibre5">Scottish Journal of Theology</i> 22 (1969):257–77.</p>
<p class="rf">LaCugna, C.M., ‘The Relational God,’ <i class="calibre5">Theological Studies</i> 46 (1985):647–63.</p>
<p class="rf"><a id="page_296" class="calibre3"></a>Lambrecht, J. (ed.), <i class="calibre5">Hoelang Nog en Waarom Toch? God Mens en Lijden</i>. Leuven/Amersfoort: Acco, 1988.</p>
<p class="rf">Lambrecht, J. and R.F. Collins (eds), <i class="calibre5">God and Human Suffering</i>. Louvain: Peeters Press, 1990.</p>
<p class="rf">Lampe, G.W.H., <i class="calibre5">God as Spirit</i>. Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1977.</p>
<p class="rf">Lang, U., <i class="calibre5">Studies in the Christology of John Philoponus and its Place in the Controversies Over Chalcedon</i>. Oxford: D.Phil. dissertation, 1999.</p>
<p class="rf">Leaman, O., <i class="calibre5">Evil and Suffering in Jewish Philosophy</i>. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1995.</p>
<p class="rf">Lee, J.Y., <i class="calibre5">God Suffers for Us: A Systematic Inquiry Into a Concept of Divine Passibility</i>. The Hague: Martinus Nijhoff, 1974.</p>
<p class="rf">Leo XIII, <i class="calibre5">Divinum Illud</i> (1897).</p>
<p class="rf">Lilla, S.R.C., <i class="calibre5">Clement of Alexandria: A Study in Christian Platonism and Gnosticism</i>. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1971.</p>
<p class="rf">Livingstone, E.A. (ed.), <i class="calibre5">The Oxford Dictionary of the Christian Church</i>, third edition. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1997.</p>
<p class="rf">Loewe, W., ‘Two Theologians of the Cross: Karl Barth and Jürgen Moltmann,’ <i class="calibre5">The Thomist</i> 41/4 (1977):510–39.</p>
<p class="rf">Lösel, S., ‘Murder in the Cathedral: Hans Urs von Balthasar’s New Dramatization of the Doctrine of the Trinity,’ <i class="calibre5">Pro Ecclesia</i> 5/4 (1996):427–39.</p>
<p class="rf">Louth, A., <i class="calibre5">The Origins of the Christian Mystical Tradition</i>. Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1981.</p>
<p class="rf">Lucas, J., <i class="calibre5">The Future</i>. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1989.</p>
<p class="rf">Lyonnet, S. and L. Sabourin (eds), <i class="calibre5">Sin, Redemption, and Sacrifice: A Biblical and Patristic Study</i>. Rome: Biblical Institute Press, 1970.</p>
<p class="rf">Maas, W., <i class="calibre5">Unveränderlichkeit Gottes: Zum Verhältnis von griechischphilosophischer und christlicher Gotteslehre</i>. Munich: Schönigh, 1974.</p>
<p class="rf">MacGregor, G., <i class="calibre5">He Who Lets Us Be: A Theology of Love</i>. New York: Seabury Press, 1975.</p>
<p class="rf">Macquarrie, J., <i class="calibre5">In Search of Deity: An Essay in Dialectical Theism</i>. London: SCM, 1984.</p>
<p class="rf">—, <i class="calibre5">Jesus Christ in Modern Thought</i>. London: SCM, 1990.</p>
<p class="rf">—, <i class="calibre5">Christology Revisited</i>. London: SCM, 1998.</p>
<p class="rf">Marcel, G., <i class="calibre5">The Mystery of Being, I: Reflection and Mystery</i>. London: The Harvill Press, 1950.</p>
<p class="rf">Maritain, J., <i class="calibre5">A Preface to Metaphysics</i>. London: Sheed &amp; Ward, 1939.</p>
<p class="rf">—, ‘Quelques Réflexions sur le Savoir Théologique,’ <i class="calibre5">Revue Thomiste</i> 69/1 (1969):5–27.</p>
<p class="rf">Marshall, LH., <i class="calibre5">Jesus the Saviour</i>. Downer Grove: InterVarsity Press, 1990.</p>
<p class="rf">Martin, R., <i class="calibre5">The Suffering of Love</i>. Petersham: St Bede’s Publications, 1995.</p>
<p class="rf">Mascall, E.L., <i class="calibre5">Existence and Analogy</i>. London: Libra Books, 1966.</p>
<p class="rf">—, <i class="calibre5">He Who Is</i>. London: Libra Books, 1966.</p>
<p class="rf">—, <i class="calibre5">Theology and the Gospel of Christ</i>. London: Darton, Longman &amp; Todd, 1977.</p>
<p class="rf">—, <i class="calibre5">Whatever Happened to the Human Mind?</i> London: SPCK, 1980.</p>
<p class="rf">May, G., <i class="calibre5">Creatio Ex Nihilo: The Doctrine of ‘Creation out of Nothing’ in Early Christian Thought</i>. Edinburgh: T &amp; T Clark, 1994.</p>
<p class="rf">McCabe, H., <i class="calibre5">God Matters</i>. London: Geoffrey Chapman, 1987.</p>
<p class="rf"><a id="page_297" class="calibre3"></a>McGill, A., <i class="calibre5">Suffering: A Test of Theological Method</i>. Philadelphia: Westminster Press, 1982.</p>
<p class="rf">McGrath, A.E., <i class="calibre5">The Genesis of Doctrine: A Study in the Foundation of Doctrinal Criticism</i>. Grand Rapids: Eerdmans, 1997.</p>
<p class="rf">McGuckin, J., <i class="calibre5">St Cyril of Alexandria: The Christological Controversy</i>. Leiden: E.J. Brill, 1994.</p>
<p class="rf">McIntyre, J., Review of Moltmann’s <i class="calibre5">God in Creation</i> in <i class="calibre5">Scottish Journal of Theology</i> 41 (1988):267–73.</p>
<p class="rf">—, <i class="calibre5">The Shape of Soteriology</i>. Edinburgh: T &amp; T Clark, 1992.</p>
<p class="rf">—, <i class="calibre5">The Shape of Pneumatology</i>. Edinburgh: T &amp; T Clark, 1997.</p>
<p class="rf">—, <i class="calibre5">The Shape of Christology</i> (Second Edition). Edinburgh: T &amp; T Clark, 1998.</p>
<p class="rf">McWilliams, W., ‘Divine Suffering in Contemporary Theology,’ <i class="calibre5">Scottish Journal of Theology</i> 33 (1980):35–53.</p>
<p class="rf">—, <i class="calibre5">The Passion of God: Divine Suffering in Contemporary Protestant Thought</i>. Macon: Mercer University Press, 1985.</p>
<p class="rf">Meijering, E.P., <i class="calibre5">God Being History</i>. Amsterdam: North-Holland Publishing Company, 1974.</p>
<p class="rf">Mellert, D., <i class="calibre5">What is Process Theology?</i> New York: Paulist Press, 1975.</p>
<p class="rf">Metz, J.-B., <i class="calibre5">The Emergent Church: The Future of Christianity in a Postbourgeois World</i>. New York: Crossroad, 1981.</p>
<p class="rf">—, ‘Suffering Unto God,’ <i class="calibre5">Critical Inquiry</i> 20 (1994):611–22.</p>
<p class="rf">—, <i class="calibre5">A Passion for God: The Mystical-Political Dimension of Christianity</i>. New York: Paulist Press, 1998.</p>
<p class="rf">Meunier, B., <i class="calibre5">Le Christ de Cyrille D’Alexandrie: L’Humanité, Le Salut et La Question Monophysite</i>. Paris: Beauchesne, 1997.</p>
<p class="rf">Meyendorff, J., <i class="calibre5">Christ in Eastern Christian Thought</i>. Crestwood: St Vladimir’s Press, 1975.</p>
<p class="rf">—, <i class="calibre5">Byzantine Theology: Historical Trends and Doctrinal Themes</i>. New York: Fordham University Press, 1979.</p>
<p class="rf">Milbank, J., <i class="calibre5">The Word Made Strange: Theology, Language and Culture</i>. Oxford: Blackwell, 1997.</p>
<p class="rf">Minns, D., <i class="calibre5">Irenaeus</i>. London: Geoffrey Chapman, 1994.</p>
<p class="rf">Molnar, P., ‘The Function of the Trinity in Moltmann’s Ecological Doctrine of Creation,’ <i class="calibre5">Theological Studies</i> 51 (1990):673–97.</p>
<p class="rf">—, ‘Moltmann’s Post-Modern Messianic Christology,’ <i class="calibre5">The Thomist</i> 56/4 (1992):669–93.</p>
<p class="rf">Moltmann, J., <i class="calibre5">The Crucified God</i>. London: SCM, 1974.</p>
<p class="rf">—, <i class="calibre5">The Trinity and Kingdom of God</i>. London: SCM, 1981.</p>
<p class="rf">—, <i class="calibre5">God in Creation: An Ecological Doctrine of Creation</i>. London: SCM, 1985.</p>
<p class="rf">—, <i class="calibre5">The Way of Jesus Christ</i>. London: SCM, 1990.</p>
<p class="rf">—, <i class="calibre5">History and the Triune God</i>. London: SCM, 1991.</p>
<p class="rf">Moore, J.F., ‘A Spectrum of Views: Traditional Christian Responses to the Holocaust,’ <i class="calibre5">Journal of Ecumenical Studies</i> 25/2 (1988):212–24.</p>
<p class="rf">Moore, S., ‘God Suffered,’ <i class="calibre5">Downside Review</i> 27 (1959):122–40.</p>
<p class="rf">Morris, T.V., <i class="calibre5">The Logic of God Incarnate</i>. Ithaca: Cornell University Press, 1986.</p>
<p class="rf">—, (ed.), <i class="calibre5">The Concept of God</i>. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1987.</p>
<p class="rf">—, (ed.), <i class="calibre5">Philosophy and the Christian Faith</i>. Notre Dame: University of Notre Dame Press, 1988.</p>
<p class="rf"><a id="page_298" class="calibre3"></a>Moule, C.F.D., <i class="calibre5">The Origin of Christology</i>. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1977.</p>
<p class="rf">Mozley, J.K., <i class="calibre5">The Impassibility of God: A Survey of Christian Thought</i>. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1926.</p>
<p class="rf">Mühlen, H., <i class="calibre5">Die Veränderlichkeit Gottes als Horizont einer zukünftigen Christologie</i>. Münster: Aschendorff, 1969.</p>
<p class="rf">Muller, E., ‘Real Relations and the Divine: Issues in Thomas’s Understanding of God’s Relation to the World,’ <i class="calibre5">Theological Studies</i> 56 (1995):673–95.</p>
<p class="rf">Muller, R.A., ‘Incarnation, Immutability, and the Case for Classical Theism,’ <i class="calibre5">Westminster Theological Journal</i> 45 (1983):22–40.</p>
<p class="rf">Murray, J.C., <i class="calibre5">The Problem of God</i>. New Haven: Yale University Press, 1964.</p>
<p class="rf">Musurillo, H. (ed. and trans.), <i class="calibre5">From Glory to Glory: Texts from Gregory of Nyssa’s Mystical Writings</i>. Crestwood: St Vladimir’s Press, 1979.</p>
<p class="rf">Nestorius, <i class="calibre5">Liber Heraclidis</i>, trans. <i class="calibre5">The Bazaar of Heracleides</i>, Driver, C.R. and L. Hodgson (eds). Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1925.</p>
<p class="rf">Neville, R., <i class="calibre5">God the Creator: On the Transcendence and Presence of God</i>. Chicago: The University of Chicago Press, 1968.</p>
<p class="rf">Newman, J.H., <i class="calibre5">Essay on the Development of Christian Doctrine</i>. Harmondsworth: Penguin, 1974.</p>
<p class="rf">Nicolas, J.-H., ‘Aimante et Bienheureuse Trinité’, <i class="calibre5">Revue Thomiste</i> 73 (1978):271–87.</p>
<p class="rf">—, ‘La Souffrance de Dieu?’ <i class="calibre5">Nova et Vetera</i> 53 (1978):56–64.</p>
<p class="rf">Norris, R.A., <i class="calibre5">God and World in Early Christian Theology</i>. London: Adam &amp; Charles Black, 1966.</p>
<p class="rf">—, ‘Christological Models in Cyril of Alexandria,’ <i class="calibre5">Studia Patristica</i> 13 (1975):255–68.</p>
<p class="rf">—, ‘The Problem of Human Identity in Patristic Christological Speculation,’ <i class="calibre5">Studia Patristica</i> 17/1 (1982):147–59.</p>
<p class="rf">—, (ed.), <i class="calibre5">Lux in Lumine</i>. New York: Seabury Press, 1966.</p>
<p class="rf">Oben, F.M., <i class="calibre5">Edith Stein: Scholar, Feminist, Saint</i>. New York: Alba House, 1988.</p>
<p class="rf">O’Collins, G., <i class="calibre5">Interpreting Jesus</i>. London: Geoffrey Chapman, 1983.</p>
<p class="rf">—, <i class="calibre5">Christology</i>. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1995.</p>
<p class="rf">O’Donnell, J., <i class="calibre5">Trinity and Temporality</i>. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1983.</p>
<p class="rf">Ogden, S., <i class="calibre5">The Reality of God</i>. New York: Harper and Row, 1961.</p>
<p class="rf">O’Hanlon, G.F., ‘Does God Change? H.U. von Balthasar and the Immutability of God,’ <i class="calibre5">The Irish Theological Quarterly</i> 53(1987): 161–83.</p>
<p class="rf">—, <i class="calibre5">The Immutability of God in the Theology of Hans Urs Von Balthasar</i>. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1990.</p>
<p class="rf">O’Keefe, J.J., ‘Impassible Suffering? Divine Passion and Fifth-Century Christology,’ <i class="calibre5">Theological Studies</i> 58 (1997):39–59.</p>
<p class="rf">—, ‘Kenosis or Impassibility: Cyril of Alexandria and Theodoret of Cyrus on the Problem of Divine Pathos,’ <i class="calibre5">Studia Patristica</i> 38 (1997):358–65.</p>
<p class="rf">Origen, <i class="calibre5">Contra Celsum</i>, trans. H. Chadwick. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1953.</p>
<p class="rf">—, <i class="calibre5">On First Principles</i>, trans. G.W. Butterworth. Gloucester: Peter Smith, 1973.</p>
<p class="rf"><a id="page_299" class="calibre3"></a>O’Rourke, F. (ed.), <i class="calibre5">At the Heart of the Real</i>. Dublin: Irish Academic Press, 1992.</p>
<p class="rf">Osborn, E.F., <i class="calibre5">Justin Martyr</i>. Tübingen: Mohr, 1973.</p>
<p class="rf">—, <i class="calibre5">The Philosophy of Clement of Alexandria</i>. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1975.</p>
<p class="rf">Ouellet, M., ‘The Message of Balthasar’s Theology to Modern Theology,’ <i class="calibre5">Communio</i> 23 (1996):286–99.</p>
<p class="rf">Owen, H.P., <i class="calibre5">Concepts of Deity</i>. London: Macmillan, 1971.</p>
<p class="rf">Pailin, D., ‘The Utterly Absolute and the Totally Related: Change in God,’ <i class="calibre5">New Blackfriars</i> 68 (1987):243–55.</p>
<p class="rf">Pannenberg, W., <i class="calibre5">Basic Questions in Theology</i>, Vol. 1. London: SCM, 1971.</p>
<p class="rf">—, <i class="calibre5">Systematic Theology</i>, Vol. 1. Grand Rapids: Eerdmans, 1991.</p>
<p class="rf">Papal International Theological Commission, <i class="calibre5">Select Questions on Christology</i> (1981).</p>
<p class="rf">—, <i class="calibre5">Theology, Christology, Anthropology</i> (1983).</p>
<p class="rf">Paul VI, <i class="calibre5">Evangelii Nuntiandi</i> (1975).</p>
<p class="rf">Pelikan, J., <i class="calibre5">The Christian Tradition: A History of the Development of Doctrine 1: The Emergence of the Catholic Tradition (100–600)</i>. Chicago: University Press of Chicago, 1971.</p>
<p class="rf">Philo of Alexandria, <i class="calibre5">The Works of Philo</i>, trans. C.D. Yonge. Peabody: Hendrickson Publishers, 1993.</p>
<p class="rf">Pinnock, C., R. Rice, J. Sanders, W. Hasker and D. Basinger, <i class="calibre5">The Openness of God: A Biblical Challenge to the Traditional Understanding of God</i>. Carlisle: The Paternoster Press, 1994.</p>
<p class="rf">Pittenger, N., <i class="calibre5">The Word Incarnate</i>. Welwyn: James Nisbet and Co., 1959.</p>
<p class="rf">—, <i class="calibre5">God in Process</i>. London: SCM, 1967.</p>
<p class="rf">—, <i class="calibre5">Process Thought and Christian Faith</i>. New York: Macmillan, 1968.</p>
<p class="rf">—, <i class="calibre5">Christology Reconsidered</i>. London: SCM, 1970.</p>
<p class="rf">Pius XII, <i class="calibre5">Mystici Corporis</i> (1943).</p>
<p class="rf">Pollard, T.E., ‘The Impassibility of God,’ <i class="calibre5">Scottish Journal of Theology</i> 8 (1955):353–64.</p>
<p class="rf">Power, N. and F.K. Lumbala (eds), <i class="calibre5">Concilium: The Spectre of Mass Death</i>. London: SPCK, 1993.</p>
<p class="rf">Prestige, G.L., <i class="calibre5">God in Patristic Thought</i>. London: SPCK, 1952.</p>
<p class="rf">—, <i class="calibre5">Fathers and Heretics</i>. London: SPCK, 1968.</p>
<p class="rf">Quinn, J., ‘Triune Self-Giving: One Key to the Problem of Suffering,’ <i class="calibre5">The Thomist</i> 44 (1980):173–218.</p>
<p class="rf">Rahner, K., <i class="calibre5">Theological Investigations</i>, Vol. 28. New York: Crossroad, 1983.</p>
<p class="rf">Reichmann, J.B., ‘Immanently Transcendent and Subsistent Esse: A Comparison,’ <i class="calibre5">The Thomist</i> 38/2 (1974):335–43.</p>
<p class="rf">—, ‘Aquinas, God and Historical Process,’ <i class="calibre5">Tommaso d’Aquino nel suo settimo centenario</i>, Vol. 9, pp. 427–36. Napoli: Edizioni Dominicane Italiane, 1978.</p>
<p class="rf">Richard, L., <i class="calibre5">The Mystery of Redemption</i>. Baltimore: Helicon, 1965.</p>
<p class="rf">Richard, L., <i class="calibre5">What Are They Saying About the Theology of Suffering?</i> New York: Paulist Press, 1992.</p>
<p class="rf">Rivière, J., <i class="calibre5">The Doctrine of the Atonement: A Historical Essay</i>. London: Kegan Paul, 1909.</p>
<p class="rf">Roth, R.J. (ed.), <i class="calibre5">God Knowable and Unknowable</i>. New York: Fordham University Press, 1973.</p>
<p class="rf"><a id="page_300" class="calibre3"></a>Rousseau, M., ‘Process Thought and Traditional Theism: A Critique,’ <i class="calibre5">The Modern Schoolman</i> 62 (1985):45–64.</p>
<p class="rf">Rubenstein, R.L., <i class="calibre5">After Auschwitz: History, Theology, and Contemporary Judaism</i>, second edition. Baltimore: The Johns Hopkins University Press, 1992.</p>
<p class="rf">Runia, D.T., <i class="calibre5">Philo in Early Christian Literature</i>. Assen: Van Gorcu, 1993.</p>
<p class="rf">Russell, J.M., ‘Impassibility and Pathos in Barth’s Idea of God,’ <i class="calibre5">Anglican Theological Review</i> 60/3 (1988):221–32.</p>
<p class="rf">Sabourin, L., <i class="calibre5">Christology</i>. New York: Alba House, 1984.</p>
<p class="rf">Sandmel, S., <i class="calibre5">Philo of Alexandria</i>. New York: Oxford University Press, 1979.</p>
<p class="rf">Sarot, M., ‘De Passibilitas Dei in de Hendendaagse Westerse Theologie: Een Literaturoverzicht,’ <i class="calibre5">Kerk en Theologie</i> 40 (1989):196–206.</p>
<p class="rf">—, ‘Patripassianism, Theopaschitism, and the Suffering of God: Some Historical and Systematic Considerations,’ <i class="calibre5">Religious Studies</i> 26 (1990):363–75.</p>
<p class="rf">—, ‘Auschwitz, Morality and the Suffering of God,’ <i class="calibre5">Modern Theology</i> 7/2 (1991):135–52.</p>
<p class="rf">—, <i class="calibre5">God, Passibility and Corporeality</i>. Kampen: Kok Pharos Publishing House, 1992.</p>
<p class="rf">—, ‘Suffering of Christ, Suffering of God?’ <i class="calibre5">Theology</i> 95 (1992):113–19.</p>
<p class="rf">—, ‘Divine Compassion and the Meaning of Life,’ <i class="calibre5">Scottish Journal of Theology</i> 48/2 (1995):155–68.</p>
<p class="rf">—, ‘Pastoral Counseling and the Compassionate God,’ <i class="calibre5">Pastoral Psychology</i> 43 (1995):185–90.</p>
<p class="rf">—, ‘Divine Suffering: Continuity and Discontinuity with the Tradition,’ <i class="calibre5">Anglican Theological Review</i> 78/2 (1996):225–40.</p>
<p class="rf">Schaff, P. (ed.), <i class="calibre5">Ante-Nicene, Nicene and Post-Nicene Fathers</i>. Reprinted Edinburgh: T &amp; T Clark, 1989.</p>
<p class="rf">Schnackenburg, R., <i class="calibre5">Jesus in the Gospels</i>. Louisville: Westminster/John Knox Press, 1995.</p>
<p class="rf">Sellers, R.V., <i class="calibre5">The Council of Chalcedon</i>. London: SPCK, 1961.</p>
<p class="rf">Shea, N., ‘Atrocities Not Fit to Print,’ <i class="calibre5">First Things</i> 77 (1997):32–35.</p>
<p class="rf">Sia, S., ‘The Doctrine of God’s Immutability: Introducing the Modern Debate,’ <i class="calibre5">New Blackfriars</i> 68 (1987):220–32.</p>
<p class="rf">Siddals, R., ‘Oneness and Difference in the Christology of Cyril of Alexandria,’ <i class="calibre5">Studia Patristica</i> 18/1 (1985):207–11.</p>
<p class="rf">—, ‘Logic and Christology in Cyril of Alexandria,’ <i class="calibre5">Journal of Theological Studies</i> NS 38/2 (1987):341–67.</p>
<p class="rf">Slusser, M., <i class="calibre5">Theopaschite Expressions in Second-Century Christianity as Reflected in the Writings of Justin, Melito, Celsus and Irenaeus</i>. Oxford: D.Phil. dissertation, 1975.</p>
<p class="rf">—, ‘The Scope of Patripassianism,’ <i class="calibre5">Studia Patristica</i> 17/1 (1982):169–75.</p>
<p class="rf">Smith, H., ‘Has Process Theology Dismantled Classical Theism?’ <i class="calibre5">Theological Digest</i> 35/4 (1988):303–18.</p>
<p class="rf">Sobrino, J., <i class="calibre5">Christology at the Crossroads</i>. London: SCM, 1978.</p>
<p class="rf">Sokolowski, R., <i class="calibre5">The God of Faith and Reason</i>. Notre Dame: University Press of Notre Dame, 1982.</p>
<p class="rf">Sölle, D., <i class="calibre5">Suffering</i>. Philadelphia: Fortress Press, 1975.</p>
<p class="rf">Solomon, N., <i class="calibre5">Judaism and World Religion</i>. London: Macmillan, 1991.</p>
<p class="rf">Sponheim, P., ‘Transcendence in Relationship,’ <i class="calibre5">Dialog</i> 12 (1973):264–71.</p>
<p class="rf"><a id="page_301" class="calibre3"></a>Staniforth, M. (ed. and trans.), <i class="calibre5">Early Christian Writings</i>. London: Penguin, 1968.</p>
<p class="rf">Stead, c., <i class="calibre5">Philosophy in Christian Antiquity</i>. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1994.</p>
<p class="rf">Steen, M., ‘Jürgen Moltmann’s Critical Reception of K. Barth’s Theopaschitism,’ <i class="calibre5">Ephemerides Theologicae Lovanienses</i> 67/4 (1991):278–311.</p>
<p class="rf">Stein, E., <i class="calibre5">The Science of the Cross: A Study of St John of the Cross</i>. Chicago: Henry Regnery, 1960.</p>
<p class="rf">—, <i class="calibre5">On the Problem of Empathy</i>. The Hague: Martinus Nijhoff, 1964.</p>
<p class="rf">—, <i class="calibre5">Life in a Jewish Family</i>. Washington, DC: ICS Press, 1986.</p>
<p class="rf">—, <i class="calibre5">Essays on Woman</i>. Washington, DC: ICS Press, 1987.</p>
<p class="rf">—, <i class="calibre5">The Hidden Life: Essays, Meditations, Spiritual Texts</i>. Washington, DC: ICS Press, 1992.</p>
<p class="rf">Studer, B., <i class="calibre5">Trinity and Incarnation</i>. Collegeville: The Liturgical Press, 1993.</p>
<p class="rf">Sullivan, J. (ed.), <i class="calibre5">Blessed by the Cross: Five Portraits of Edith Stein</i>. New Rochelle: Catholics United for the Faith, 1990.</p>
<p class="rf">Surin, K. ‘The Impassibility of God and the Problem of Evil,’ <i class="calibre5">Scottish Journal of Theology</i> 35 (1982):97–115.</p>
<p class="rf">—, ‘Theodicy?’ <i class="calibre5">Harvard Theological Review</i> 76 (1983):225–47.</p>
<p class="rf">—, <i class="calibre5">Theology and the Problem of Evil</i>. Oxford: Basil Blackwell, 1986.</p>
<p class="rf">Swinburne, R., <i class="calibre5">The Coherence of Theism: Revised Edition</i>. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1993.</p>
<p class="rf">—, <i class="calibre5">The Christian God</i>. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1994.</p>
<p class="rf">Sykes, S.W. (ed.), <i class="calibre5">Sacrifice and Redemption: Durham Essays in Theology</i>. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1991.</p>
<p class="rf">Sykes, S.W. and J.P. Clayton (eds), <i class="calibre5">Christ, Faith and History</i>. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1972.</p>
<p class="rf">Talbert, C.H., <i class="calibre5">Learning through Suffering: The Educational Value of Suffering in the New Testament and in its Milieu</i>. Collegeville: The Liturgical Press, 1991.</p>
<p class="rf">Taliaferro, C., ‘The Passibility of God,’ <i class="calibre5">Religious Studies</i> 25/2 (1989):217–24.</p>
<p class="rf">Tanner, K., <i class="calibre5">God and Creation in Christian Theology</i>. London: Blackwell, 1988.</p>
<p class="rf">Taylor, V., <i class="calibre5">Forgiveness and Reconciliation: A Study in New Testament Theology</i>. London: Macmillan, 1946.</p>
<p class="rf">—, <i class="calibre5">The Atonement in New Testament Theology</i>. London: Epworth, 1958.</p>
<p class="rf">—, <i class="calibre5">Jesus and His Sacrifice</i>. London: Macmillan, 1959.</p>
<p class="rf">Terrien, S., <i class="calibre5">The Elusive Presence: Toward a New Biblical Theology</i>. San Francisco: Harper &amp; Row, 1978.</p>
<p class="rf">Thompson, W.M., <i class="calibre5">The Jesus Debate</i>. New York: Paulist Press, 1985.</p>
<p class="rf">Torrance, T.F., <i class="calibre5">The Mediation of Christ</i>. Edinburgh: T &amp; T Clark, 1992.</p>
<p class="rf">—, <i class="calibre5">The Christian Doctrine of God: One Being Three Persons</i>. Edinburgh: T &amp; T Clark, 1996.</p>
<p class="rf">Tracy, D. and E. Schlüsser Fiorenza (eds), <i class="calibre5">Concilium: The Holocaust as Interpretation</i>. London: SPCK, 1984.</p>
<p class="rf">Tracy, T. (ed.), <i class="calibre5">The God Who Acts</i>. University Park: The Pennsylvania State University Press, 1994.</p>
<p class="rf">Trigg, J.W., <i class="calibre5">Origen: The Bible and Philosophy in the Third-Century Church</i>. London: SCM, 1983.</p>
<p class="rf"><a id="page_302" class="calibre3"></a>Turner, H.E.W., <i class="calibre5">The Patristic Doctrine of Redemption</i>. London: Mowbray, 1952.</p>
<p class="rf">—, ‘Nestorius Reconsidered,’ <i class="calibre5">Studia Patristica</i> 13 (1975):306–21.</p>
<p class="rf">van Beeck, F.J., “‘This Weakness of God’s is Stronger” (1 Cor. 1:25): An Inquiry Beyond the Power of Being,’ <i class="calibre5">Toronto Journal of Theology</i> 9/1 (1993):9–26.</p>
<p class="rf">Vanhoutte, J., ‘God as Companion and Fellow-Suffer,’ <i class="calibre5">Arhivio di Filosofia</i> 56, 1–3 (1988):191–225.</p>
<p class="rf">Vann, G., <i class="calibre5">The Pain of Christ and the Sorrow of God</i>. London: Blackfriars, 1947.</p>
<p class="rf">Vanstone, W.H., <i class="calibre5">Love’s Endeavour, Love’s Expense</i>. London: Darton, Longman &amp; Todd, 1977.</p>
<p class="rf">Varillon, F., <i class="calibre5">La Souffrance de Dieu</i>. Paris: Le Centurion, 1975.</p>
<p class="rf">Vatican Council II, <i class="calibre5">Lumen Gentium</i> (1964).</p>
<p class="rf">—, <i class="calibre5">Gaudium et Spes</i> (1965).</p>
<p class="rf">—, <i class="calibre5">Ad Gentes Divinitus</i> (1965).</p>
<p class="rf">Vawter, B., <i class="calibre5">This Man Jesus</i>. London: Geoffrey Chapman, 1975.</p>
<p class="rf">von Balthasar, H.U., <i class="calibre5">Mysterium Paschale</i>. Edinburgh: T &amp; T Clark, 1990.</p>
<p class="rf">—, <i class="calibre5">Explorations in Theology III: Creator Spirit</i>. San Francisco: Ignatius Press, 1993.</p>
<p class="rf">—, <i class="calibre5">Theo-Drama IV: The Action</i>. San Francisco: Ignatius Press, 1994.</p>
<p class="rf">—, <i class="calibre5">Theo-Drama V: The Last Act</i>. San Francisco: Ignatius Press, 1998.</p>
<p class="rf">von Hügel, F., <i class="calibre5">Essays and Addresses on the Philosophy of Religion</i>, second series. London: J.M. Dent &amp; Sons, 1926.</p>
<p class="rf">Wainwright, A.W., <i class="calibre5">The Trinity in the New Testament</i>. London: SPCK, 1962.</p>
<p class="rf">Walsh, B., ‘Theology of Hope and the Doctrine of Creation: An Appraisal of Jürgen Moltmann,’ <i class="calibre5">Evangelical Quarterly</i> 59 (1987):53–76.</p>
<p class="rf">Walsh, J. and R.G. Walsh, <i class="calibre5">Divine Providence and Human Suffering</i>. Wilmington: Michael Glazier, 1985.</p>
<p class="rf">Walsh, W.J., <i class="calibre5">A History of Philosophy</i>. London: Geoffrey Chapman, 1985.</p>
<p class="rf">Ward, K., <i class="calibre5">Religion and Creation</i>. Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1996.</p>
<p class="rf">Ware, K., <i class="calibre5">The Humanity of Christ</i>, The Fourth Constantinople Lecture. London: Anglican and Eastern Churches Association, 1985.</p>
<p class="rf">Watson, G., <i class="calibre5">Greek Philosophy and the Christian Notion of God</i>. Dublin: The Columba Press, 1994.</p>
<p class="rf">Webster, J., ‘Jürgen Moltmann: Trinity and Suffering,’ <i class="calibre5">Evangel</i> Summer (1985):4–6.</p>
<p class="rf">—, Eberhard Jüngel: <i class="calibre5">An Introduction to His Theology</i>. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1986.</p>
<p class="rf">—, <i class="calibre5">Theological Theology: An Inaugural Lecture</i>. Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1998.</p>
<p class="rf">Weinandy, T., <i class="calibre5">Does God Change?: The Word’s Becoming in the Incarnation</i>. Petersham: St Bede’s Publications, 1985.</p>
<p class="rf">—, ‘Toward Overcoming the Spirit of Resentment in a Polarized Church,’ <i class="calibre5">New Oxford Review</i> 57/9 (1990):14–17.</p>
<p class="rf">—, <i class="calibre5">In the Likeness of Sinful Flesh: An Essay on the Humanity of Christ</i>. Edinburgh: T &amp; T Clark, 1993.</p>
<p class="rf">—, <i class="calibre5">The Father’s Spirit of Sonship: Reconceiving the Trinity</i>. Edinburgh: T &amp; T Clark, 1995.</p>
<p class="rf"><a id="page_303" class="calibre3"></a>—, ‘The Case for Spirit Christology: Some Reflections,’ <i class="calibre5">The Thomist</i> 59/2 (1995):173–88.</p>
<p class="rf">—, ‘Gnosticism and Contemporary Soteriology: Some Reflections,’ <i class="calibre5">New Blackfriars</i> 76 (1995):546–54.</p>
<p class="rf">—, ‘The Soul/Body Analogy and the Incarnation: Cyril of Alexandria,’ <i class="calibre5">Coptic Church Review</i> 17 (1996):59–66.</p>
<p class="rf">—, ‘The Human “I” of Jesus,’ <i class="calibre5">The Irish Theological Quarterly</i> 62/4 (1996/97):259–68.</p>
<p class="rf">Welch, L., ‘Logos-Sarx? Sarx and the Soul of Christ in the Early Thought of Cyril of Alexandria,’ <i class="calibre5">St Vladimir’s Theological Quarterly</i> 38 (1994):271–92.</p>
<p class="rf">Wendebourg, D., ‘Chalcedon in Ecumenical Discourse,’ <i class="calibre5">Pro Ecclesia</i> 7/3 (1998):307–32.</p>
<p class="rf">Wesche, K.P., ‘The Union of God and Man in Jesus Christ in the Thought of Gregory of Nazianzus,’ <i class="calibre5">St Vladimir’s Theological Quarterly</i> 28/2 (1984):83–98.</p>
<p class="rf">—, ‘The Christology of Leontius of Jerusalem: Monophysite or Chalcedonian? <i class="calibre5">St Vladimir’s Theological Quarterly</i> 31/1 (1987):65–95.</p>
<p class="rf">Westermann, c., <i class="calibre5">What Does the Old Testament Say About God?</i> London: SPCK, 1979.</p>
<p class="rf">Wheeler Robinson, H., <i class="calibre5">Suffering Human and Divine</i>. New York: Macmillan, 1939.</p>
<p class="rf">Whitehead, A.N., <i class="calibre5">Religion in the Making</i>. London: Cambridge University Press, 1926.</p>
<p class="rf">—, <i class="calibre5">Process and Reality</i>. New York: Free Press, 1979.</p>
<p class="rf">Widdicombe, P., ‘Athanasius and the Making of the Doctrine of the Trinity,’ <i class="calibre5">Pro Ecclesia</i> 6/4 (1997):456–78.</p>
<p class="rf">Wiesel, E., <i class="calibre5">Night</i>. London: Fontana/Collins, 1972.</p>
<p class="rf">Wiesenthal, S., <i class="calibre5">The Sunflower: On the Possibilities and Limits of Forgiveness</i>, revised edition. New York: Schocken Books, 1997.</p>
<p class="rf">Wiles, M., <i class="calibre5">God’s Action in the World</i>. London: SCM, 1986.</p>
<p class="rf">Wilken, R.L., ‘Tradition, Exegesis, and the Christological Controversies,’ <i class="calibre5">Church History</i> 34 (1965):123–45.</p>
<p class="rf">—, <i class="calibre5">Remembering the Christian Past</i>. Grand Rapids: Eerdmans, 1995.</p>
<p class="rf">—, ‘St. Cyril of Alexandria: The Mystery of Christ in the Bible,’ <i class="calibre5">Pro Ecclesia</i> 4/4 (1995):454–78.</p>
<p class="rf">—, St Cyril of Alexandria: Biblical Expositor,’ <i class="calibre5">Coptic Church Review</i> 19/1–2 (1997):30–41.</p>
<p class="rf">Williams, D.D., <i class="calibre5">What Present-Day Theologians Are Thinking</i>. New York: Harper &amp; Row, 1952.</p>
<p class="rf">Williams, R., “‘Person” and “Personality” in Christology,’ <i class="calibre5">Downside Review</i> 94 (1976):253–60.</p>
<p class="rf">Willis, E.D., <i class="calibre5">Calvin’s Catholic Christology</i>. Leiden: E.J. Brill, 1966.</p>
<p class="rf">Winter, M., <i class="calibre5">The Atonement</i>. London: Geoffrey Chapman, 1995.</p>
<p class="rf">Wolfson, H.A., <i class="calibre5">Philo</i>, 2 Vols. Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 1947.</p>
<p class="rf">Woollcombe, K.J., ‘The Pain of God,’ <i class="calibre5">Scottish Journal of Theology</i> 20 (1967):29–48.</p>
<p class="rf">Wright, J.H., ‘Divine Knowledge and Human Freedom: The God Who Dialogues,’ <i class="calibre5">Theological Studies</i> 38 (1977):450–77.</p>
<p class="rf"><a id="page_304" class="calibre3"></a>—, ‘The Method of Process Theology: An Evaluation,’ <i class="calibre5">Communio</i> 6/1 (1979):38–55.</p>
<p class="rf">—, ‘Roger Haight’s Spirit Christology,’ <i class="calibre5">Theological Studies</i> 53 (1992):729–35.</p>
<p class="rf">Young, F., ‘A Reconsideration of Alexandrian Christology,’ <i class="calibre5">Journal of Ecclesiastical History</i> 22/2 (1971): 103–14.</p>
<p class="rf">—, <i class="calibre5">From Nicaea to Chalcedon</i>. London: SCM, 1983.</p>
<p class="rf">—, <i class="calibre5">Sacrifice and the Death of Christ</i>. London: SCM, 1983.</p>
</body>
</html>
