<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" xml:lang="en"><head> <meta charset="utf-8"/> <link href="styles/default.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/> <title>The Task of Dogmatics: Explorations In Theological Method</title>
<meta content="urn:uuid:315b474c-67c1-4f60-8074-74051f76a909" name="Adept.expected.resource"/> </head> <body> <div class="chapter" id="A8i6">

<h1 class="chapter" id="pz12-6"><a href="content-toc.xhtml#toc_04" id="noc_04">LIST OF CONTRIBUTORS</a></h1>
<p class="left" id="pz12-7">Michael Allen—is academic dean and John Dyer Trimble Professor of Systematic Theology, Reformed Theological Seminary, Orlando, Florida. He holds BA, MA, and PhD degrees from Wheaton College.</p>
<p class="left" id="pz12-8">James M. Arcadi—is a postdoctoral fellow in the School of Theology, Fuller Theological Seminary. He graduated with a BA from Biola University, an MDiv and ThM from Gordon-Conwell Theological Seminary, and a PhD from the University of Bristol, UK.</p>
<p class="left" id="pz12-9">Henri Blocher—is emeritus professor of systematic theology at Faculté Libre de Théologie Évangélique de Vaux-sur-Seine. From 2003–2008 he occupied the Gunter Knoedler Chair of Systematic Theology, Wheaton College Graduate School of Biblical and Theological Studies. He was awarded a DD (h.c.) by Gordon-Conwell Theological Seminary in 1989, and a DD (h.c.) by Westminster Theological Seminary (Philadelphia) in 2014.</p>
<p class="left" id="pz12-10">Brannon Ellis—is a publisher with Lexham. He holds a BA from Ball State University, an MA from Westminster Theological Seminary in Escondido, California, and a PhD from the University of Aberdeen.</p>
<p class="left" id="pz12-11">Joshua Malone—is associate professor of theology, Moody Bible Institute, Spokane, Washington. He holds a BS from Texas A&amp;M University, a ThM from Dallas Theological Seminary, and an MTh and PhD from the University of Aberdeen.</p>
<p class="left" id="pz12-12">Gavin Ortlund—is a resident fellow at the Carl F. H. Henry Center for Theological Understanding at Trinity Evangelical Divinity School in Deerfield, Illinois. He earned a BA from the University of Georgia, an MDiv from Covenant Theological Seminary, and a PhD from Fuller Theological Seminary.</p>
<p class="left" id="pz12-13">Katherine Sonderegger—holds the William Meade Chair in Systematic Theology, Virginia Theological Seminary. She earned an AB from Smith College, the STM and DMin degrees from Yale University, and a PhD from Brown University.</p>
<p class="left" id="pz13-1">Darren Sumner—teaches at Fuller Theological Seminary. He holds a BA from Seattle Pacific University, an MA from Wheaton College Graduate School, an MDiv from Princeton Theological Seminary, and a PhD from the University of Aberdeen.</p>
<p class="left" id="pz13-2">Scott R. Swain—is president of Reformed Theological Seminary, Orlando, Florida, where he also holds the James Woodrow Hassell Chair of Systematic Theology. He earned a BA from the University of North Florida, MDiv and ThM degrees from Southeastern Baptist Theological Seminary, and a PhD from Trinity Evangelical Divinity School.</p>
<p class="left" id="pz13-3">Chris Tilling—is senior lecturer in New Testament Studies at St. Mellitus College, London, and a visiting lecturer in the Department of Theology and Religious Studies, King’s College, London. He earned an MTheol at the University of St. Andrews, and a PhD at London School of Theology.</p>
<p class="left" id="pz13-4">Kevin J. Vanhoozer—is research professor of systematic theology at Trinity Evangelical Divinity School. He holds a BA from Westmont College, an MDiv from Westminster Theological Seminary, and a PhD from Cambridge University.</p>
<p class="left" id="pz13-5">Sameer Yadav—is assistant professor of theology at Westmont College. He graduated with a BA from Boise State University, an STM from Yale Divinity School, and a ThD from Duke University.</p> 

</div> </body> </html>