<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" xml:lang="en"><head> <meta charset="utf-8"/> <link href="styles/default.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/> <title>The Task of Dogmatics: Explorations In Theological Method</title>
<meta content="urn:uuid:315b474c-67c1-4f60-8074-74051f76a909" name="Adept.expected.resource"/> </head> <body> <div class="chapter" id="Av8">

<h1 class="chapter" id="pz11-1"><a href="content-toc.xhtml#toc_03" id="noc_03">ACKNOWLEDGMENTS</a></h1>
<p class="noind" id="pz11-2">T<span class="smallcaps" id="AqIu">HE EDITORS WOULD LIKE TO THANK</span> Dr. Paul Spears as Director of the Torrey Honors Institute, and the faculty and administration of Biola University for their support for the Fifth Los Angeles Theology Conference (LATC) in January of 2017, out of which these published proceedings grew. Without the assistance of Jessamy Delling and Caleb Aguilera who oversaw much of the practical side of the event, this conference would not have run as smoothly as it did. We are grateful to them. Thanks too to Fuller Theological Seminary for its ongoing support of LATC. As with the previous volumes in this series, the editors wish to record grateful thanks to <i>our</i> editor (and colleague), Katya Covrett, for her invaluable assistance before, during, and after the conference proceedings. Thanks too to the Zondervan Team (aka “The Z Team”)—Stan Gundry as editor-in-chief, Jesse Hillman, Kari Moore, and Josh Kessler.</p>
<p id="pz11-3">We had hoped to have Professor John Webster as a plenary speaker at the conference. Sadly, he passed away in May 2016. John was one of the most important voices in the contemporary renewal of dogmatic theology; he will be greatly missed. The conference and this book are dedicated to his memory. “For we know in part and we prophesy in part, but when completeness comes, what is in part disappears. . . . For now we see only a reflection as in a mirror; then we shall see face to face. Now I know in part; then I shall know fully, even as I am fully known” (1 Cor 13:9–10, 12). Does the dogmatic task cease when we come face-to-face with the One to whom we are fully known? Perhaps it is only the beginning. No doubt John knows.</p> 

</div> </body> </html>