<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>chapter08</title>
<link href="ebook_style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
<meta content="urn:uuid:e628635c-8169-4333-a0b2-b0f205aae46e" name="Adept.expected.resource"/>
</head>
<body>
<div>
<a id="page_131"/>
<h2 class="chapternumber">8</h2>
<h2 class="chaptertitle"><big>O</big>h, <big>J</big>esus, <big>H</big>ere with <big>U</big>s!</h2>
<p class="chapterauthor1">C. S. SONG</p>
<p class="indent"><i>The Gold-Crowned Jesus</i> is a play by the Korean Christian poet Kim Chi Ha. In the words of Daniel Berrigan, Kim Chi Ha is “a recidivist, seized and tortured again and again, tried and tried again, always charged with the same crimes—crimes of the tongue, misuse of the pen.”<sup><a href="#fn1" id="ft1">1</a></sup> As the curtain rises on the play, a Christ-pietà figure can be seen in silhouette and a song accompanied by guitar music is heard in the background.</p>
<p class="poem">That frozen sky<br/>That frozen field<br/>Even the sun has lost its light<br/>Oh, that poor, dark, dark street<br/>Where did you come from<br/>People with emaciated faces…?<br/>Running around in search of what?<br/>Those eyes<br/>Those emaciated hands</p>
<p class="poem">There is no native earth<br/>There is no place to rest your tired bodies<br/>There is no place even for a grave<br/>In the heart of winter<br/>I have been abandoned<br/>I have been abandoned…</p>
<p class="poem">Where can it be?<br/>Where is the heavenly kingdom?<br/>Over on the other side of death?<br/><a id="page_132"/>Green forest of the four seasons?<br/>Can it be there?…</p>
<p class="poem">Endless winter<br/>Darkness of the abyss that I cannot bear<br/>This tragic time and tide<br/>This endless, endless poverty<br/>This empty, cold world<br/>I cannot bear it any longer</p>
<p class="poem">Where can he be?<br/>Where can he be?<br/>Where is Jesus?<br/>That frozen sky<br/>That frozen field<br/>Even the sun has lost its light<br/>That dark, dark, poor street<br/>Where can he be?<br/>Where can he be?<br/>He who could save us<br/>Where can he be?<br/>Oh, Jesus<br/>Now here with us<br/>Oh, Jesus, with us…<sup><a href="#fn2" id="ft2">2</a></sup></p>
<p class="indent">What a world! What a life! The world in the powerful grip of darkness and life tormented by the cruel winter and sapped of its vitality! Is this the world created by a poetic fantasy chained to the prison wall? Or is this the world of chaos God had to contend with at the beginning of time—and at all times? Is this the life painted in despair by the conscience tortured in the police interrogation room? Or is this the life of pain and suffering God must endure and save in the midst of history and at the end of time? It must be both. In this world and in this life God and humanity become engaged in the search for meaning, fulfillment and destiny. This is the huge operation called salvation. But who is the saviour? Where is Jesus, the one who saves the world? Where is the Christ, the one anointed to redeem humanity?</p>
<p class="subhead"><b>WHERE IS JESUS?</b></p>
<p class="indent">The frozen sky. The dark, dark, poor street. And people with emaciated faces. Where can Jesus be, the Christ who comes to save and redeem? All the power of the pen released in <i>The Gold-Crowned Jesus</i> is devoted to probing the question. And of all people, it is Beggar and Leper, the two wretched souls, the scum of society, and not theologians who teach Christian <a id="page_133"/>doctrines, not Christians who know their catechisms by heart who ask the question. When a theologian raises it, it becomes a theological question to be settled with massive knowledge of biblical interpretation and church teaching. When a sophisticated Christian asks it, the question turns into the defence of the Christian faith against other faiths. But when a beggar turns to the question, it is not his head or his faith that turns to it. It is the stomach, his empty stomach!</p>
<p class="indent">The one who saves must save his stomach first, must fill his empty stomach first. And when a leper asks the question, his immediate concern is not the defence of faith and correct doctrine. What is at stake is his humanity—his humanity eaten away by the horrible disease and himself excluded from human community. Leper and Beggar do not have in the question “Who is Jesus?” a theological axe to grind. For them it is a question of life and death, the question of whether love is strong enough to fill an empty stomach, to restore a disfigured humanity, to create life in the midst of death.</p>
<p class="indent">Leper seeks Jesus from his troubled humanity. This is where the search for the saviour must begin, not only for Leper, but for us all. We have studied the history of Israel hard and long to discover the traces of the saviour. We have pored intently over the scriptures of the Old Testament to hear the footsteps of a messiah. We have made great efforts to recapture the image of Jesus from the witnesses of the early Christian community. We have also searched diligently through that strange Book of Revelation to envision the coming of Christ in power and glory. But most of the time we are afraid to look into our own selves, nagged by deep anxiety, unable to make theological sense of Asia, populated by millions of hungry stomachs and disfigured human beings; we are uncomfortable among those longing souls looking for salvation in their gods and lords. Our Jesus Christ is still to be linked up with the life of the vast Asian world.</p>
<p class="indent">But Leper sees differently. He sees with his tormented self and not with an abstract ideal humanity. He perceives with the broken world of injustice and not with a heavenly kingdom of harmony. He shivers in the cold winter where the ethical idealism of the Christian community does not apply. He knows something must be wrong, terribly wrong. He bursts out:</p>
<p class="blockquote">When your house gets torn down, “Stay silent, don't fight, turn the other cheek, obey the masters, the gentlemen, the police,” they tell you. “Obey them, for these are the true believers.” This is what the people who wear luxurious clothes, eat rich food, and prove their high station by displaying their wealth like to say to us. They manipulate and sweet-talk us, deny us our souls, tame us into dumb unquestioning dull-heads, well-trained pups, while they enjoy their glory, their power. Isn't it true, Jesus? Tell me if I lie. Tell me I say this because I am stupid, because I know no better.<sup><a href="#fn3" id="ft3">3</a></sup></p>
<p class="indent">These are desperate words. But they are charged with moral force demanding an answer, a response.</p>
<a id="page_134"/>
<p class="indent">What would Jesus’ response be, the Jesus who said: “If someone slaps you on the right cheek, turn and offer him your left. If a man wants to sue you for your shirt, let him have your coat as well. If a man in authority makes you go one mile, go with him two” (Matt. 5:39-40). Perhaps Jesus had in mind the situations where someone still has the other cheek to turn, a coat to give, the energy to walk the second mile. But Leper has no other cheek to turn, no coat to give, and no energy to walk the second mile. What would Jesus say to him?</p>
<p class="indent">Asia is a huge mass of such lepers. The Aborigines in Australia are such lepers. They have lived in their own land for more than 30,000 years. But since 1770 the British “claimed Australia and began to send settlers. They used it first as a penal colony, then encouraged the development of the sheep industry and agriculture, and eventually expanded into additional areas with the discovery of gold and mineral resources…; [they] negotiated no treaties, made no purchases of land, and paid no compensation. As the invaders covered the land with sheep, cattle and crops, the Aborigines were pushed aside, their food supply destroyed, their sacred sites violated. Individuals and whole groups were massacred. By 1933, the Aboriginal population, which had been 300,000 in 1788, was reduced to 60,000.”<sup><a href="#fn4" id="ft4">4</a></sup> A heart-breaking story. Listen to what they say about their land taken away from them and alienated from them:</p>
<p class="hanging2">The land is our Mother. It is the source of our existence, our religion, our identity.</p>
<p class="hanging3">To us land is a living thing. We are part of it, and it is part of us.</p>
<p class="hanging3">For many, many years Aboriginal people have been losing a little bit of themselves. We are determined we will not lose anything.</p>
<p class="hanging4">Until our land rights are recognized, we cannot be free and equal citizens with white Australians.<sup><a href="#fn5" id="ft5">5</a></sup></p>
<p class="indent">How can this not touch the heart of each one of us? It shakes the roots of our life. It makes us ponder deeply what life means within God's creation.</p>
<p class="indent">“The land is our Mother,” it says. When one thinks of life, one thinks of mother. When one speaks of life, one speaks of mother. Life begins within the mother. It grows in her. It receives flesh and blood from her. It moves within her. It breathes with her. It is securely, tenderly, lovingly, embraced in that mysterious womb of hers filled with creativity, vitality and expectation. It is there that life takes shape, forms personality and acquires identity. This is much, much more than a mere biological process. A life growing in the mother's womb is a matter of the spirit, an event of faith, an act of religion. Essentially, religion has to do with life. Is it then not natural that it basically has “the mother-character,” the feminine vitality?</p>
<p class="indent">There is how Christian faith begins. In Luke's Gospel we are told that the angel Gabriel announced to the startled Mary: “…God has been <a id="page_135"/>gracious to you; you shall conceive and bear a son, and you shall give him the name Jesus” (Lk. 1:30). In Mary's womb Jesus, the one who saves, is conceived, grows and matures. God's salvation takes form in Mary's womb as the life of one who saves. Is this conception of life, this growth of life, this birth of life in the mother's womb not itself God's saving activity? One has only to recall that famous prophecy of Isaiah when the armies of the Syro-Ephraimite alliance were marching on Jerusalem (735-34 <small>B.C.</small>). Ahab, King of Judah, and the people of Jerusalem were terrified; they “were shaken like forest trees in the wind” (7:2). To them Isaiah came with the message of hope and deliverance. “A young woman is with child, and she will bear a son, and will call him Immanuel” (7:14). In that critical time of the nation, Isaiah did not point to the fortification, to the armaments, to the troops, but to a pregnant woman (or pregnant women) as the sign of God's deliverance. The life in the mother's womb is Immanuel—God-with-us. That life is the power of hope, the key to the future, the pledge of salvation.</p>
<p class="indent"><i>Life is an act of faith. To live is to believe. And to believe is to hope</i>. That is why we can look for light in the midst of darkness. That is why we must strive for freedom when bound in bondage. That is also why we believe in the victory of love over hate, life over death. Here is a poem published on the Democracy Wall in Peking at the height of struggle for human rights in China after the fall of “The Gang of Four”:</p>
<p class="poem">While I am imprisoned in a cage of pitch darkness<br/>Still able to endure the pain from torture,<br/>I will struggle to rise, bite open my fingers,<br/>And with my blood write on the wall: Believe in Life!</p>
<p class="poem">After I have gone through all hardships of life,<br/>Dying at dawn surrounded by my posterity,<br/>I will summon my last breath with all my strength,<br/>Crying as loudly and as clearly as I can: Believe in Life!…</p>
<p class="poem">If the earth goes round and round without ceasing,<br/>If History has a new journey to make,<br/>If my children and grandchildren go on living,<br/>Then I believe in the future! Believe in Life!<sup><a href="#fn6" id="ft6">6</a></sup></p>
<p class="indent">What a powerful ode to life! What a strong faith in tomorrow despite the bitter disappointment of yesterday and today! And what a magnificent faith in the power of life reaching into eternity! This is the ode of the people. This is their faith and hope. Do we not hear in this people's ode Jesus’ ode? Do we not recognize in this people's faith the faith of Jesus? Do we not believe in this people's hope the hope of Jesus?</p>
<a id="page_136"/>
<p class="indent">When Australian Aborigines say, “Land is my Mother,” it means that there is something sacred about their land. It is deeply human. It is profoundly religious. In the land they reach to the root of their life. There they are in tune with the rhythms of life. There they are in communion with God. When they work the land, they are engaged in the sacred act of bringing life into being. And when they return to land at the end of their life's journey, they return to the womb of mother-earth, not to die, but to live. To rob them of their land amounts to robbing them of their life. To rape their land is to rape their Mother. To destroy their land is to destroy their eternity. Land is their right to life, power and eternity. “Land is my Mother!” Jesus would say amen to this. He would never say to the Australian Aborigines: “Give up your rights to the land.”</p>
<p class="subhead"><b>ISN'T IT TRUE, JESUS?</b></p>
<p class="indent">“Isn't this true, Jesus?” asks Leper. But Jesus does not reply—the Jesus pietà encased in cement with a gold crown on its head. That Jesus looks rigid and static; he cannot move. He is not a bit like Mary's son who walked the length and breadth of Palestine. He is silent. He cannot talk. He has lost the power of speech. He bears no resemblance to that workman who used to talk a lot to the crowds that came to him. And the eyes of that Jesus! These eyes do not shine with light, wisdom and love. They are cold, without emulation and passion. They are not the eyes of that man from Nazareth who relentlessly exposed the thoughts of religious leaders and looked at lepers, beggars, prostitutes, with compassion. The only thing in that Jesus pietà that shines, moves, talks, and impresses is that gold crown on its head. It shines with golden splendor in the cold wintry night. It moves with arrogance among the people who worship gold. It talks with authority in the world where everything that glitters counts. It impresses vain bishops, autocratic rulers, greedy company presidents. And it defeats lepers, beggars, prostitutes. The motionless and emotionless Jesus wearing a dazzlingly brilliant gold crown—what a grotesque spectacle! What a cruel invention of religious piety gone astray.</p>
<p class="indent">“Isn't it true, Jesus?” Leper asks the Jesus statue in a beseeching voice. If only Jesus would say yes, or just nod his head in sympathy and agreement! But from that gold crown Leper perceives something different. It seems to be saying to him: “Stay silent, don't fight, turn the other cheek, obey the masters, give your land rights away, forget your human rights, obey your military authorities.” Is this what Jesus really means? Is this what he wants us to do?</p>
<p class="indent">Leper cannot believe that this is true. He does not want to believe this is what Jesus wants. For he remembers that Jesus began his work with a powerful proclamation in the synagogue of Nazareth, his native town:</p>
<p class="blockquote">The Spirit of the Lord is upon me because he has anointed me:<br/>He has sent me to announce good news to the poor, <a id="page_137"/><br/>to proclaim release for prisoners and recovery of sight for the blind;<br/>to let the broken victims go free,<br/>to proclaim the year of the Lord's favor. (Lk. 4:17-19)</p>
<p class="indent">This is a strong advocacy for social change. This is a loud protest against corrupt political systems and authoritarian rule. This is a powerful call to repentance, to change of heart, as a sign of God's rule in the world. This is the good news that has been making a lot of difference in Asia in recent years.</p>
<p class="indent">The plight of the Korean people in Japan, for example, is well known. Although they have tried to assimilate into Japanese society, they have never been accepted as part of it. Their agony and suffering in the land of their adoption is endless. Here is a story of an old Korean widow who struggled to survive in an inhospitable land:</p>
<p class="blockquote">The eldest son was fourth in his class at Ikuno Senior High but, while there, he fell in love with a Japanese classmate, and dropped out. The relationship broke up, and now they don't know where the son is. The mother says it is not likely that he has any settled job. The second son was seventeen and at one of the best Senior Highs in Osaka, but lost all desire to study when he ran into harsh discrimination…As if they did not have enough troubles, fifteen years ago they paid 8,000,000 yen to purchase a small house, but were soon thrown out by the Japanese owner who said “No Koreans.” He didn't return the money. Yang San (the widow) says, “Why on earth did we come to Japan anyway? There is no end to our trouble. But sometimes it seems just too much. What kind of happy memories, you ask? None at all.”</p>
<p class="indent">The gold-crowned Jesus would have said to the Korean mother: resign to your fate! That same Jesus would have warned the Japanese Christian who told the story: Stay silent! But it was not the gold-crowned Jesus, but Jesus who proclaimed the release of broken victims, that was heard by the Japanese Christian. He was very disturbed. In his own words:</p>
<p class="blockquote">Hearing that, I felt it was like walking along a hot road dragging heavy feet…I first set foot in the community of Ikano, where Yang San lives, some five years ago. At that time, I had a hunch that this in the end would clarify the problem of the Japanese themselves, myself included. And that hunch was right on the mark in all its hopelessness. In all truth, I could no longer refuse to face the burden which as a Japanese I must bear.<sup><a href="#fn7" id="ft7">7</a></sup></p>
<p class="indent">Here in the old Korean widow is the broken victim Jesus mentioned. But perhaps it is more than that. In her, in that prisoner of human discrimination, <a id="page_138"/>Jesus is seen and heard. That Japanese friend started a literacy programme for Korean mothers. The purpose “is not just to have the mothers learn to read and write Japanese, but also to bring a release of the humanity of the people.”<sup><a href="#fn8" id="ft8">8</a></sup> The meeting with Jesus of Nazareth took place there.</p>
<p class="indent">Isn't it true, Jesus? Leper continues to ask, for it is still his lot to suffer. This world of Asia is a prison of suffering. No matter where you turn, you are confronted with human tragedies, personal, national, and regional, staggering you and making your heart sink. There is nothing to boast about suffering. Suffering is the pain one feels in one's flesh and bones. There is nothing virtuous about suffering. It is an evil thing which, like sulfuric acid, destroys the beauty and grace of humanity. And suffering is an evil force mobilized by a satanical power to stop the flow of time, to deprive the world of a future, and to take away hope from human beings. As such, suffering is no monopoly of Asian peoples. It strikes men, women and children, in the East and in the West, in the South and in the North. The entire world, even the whole creation, lies exposed to the assault of the destructive power of suffering. As St. Paul so poignantly puts it: “Up to the present, we know, the whole created universe groans in all its parts as if in the pangs of childbirth” (Rom. 8:22). He could not have been more right.</p>
<p class="indent">But suffering in Asia has a particularly sinister and ugly face. “More Asians are hungry, homeless, unemployed and illiterate,” it is reported, “than all the rest of the world put together. More men and women are despised, humiliated, cheated; more suffer the tyranny of governments and oppressive elites, and the fear and shame that tyranny brings, than all the rest of the world combined.”<sup><a href="#fn9" id="ft9">9</a></sup> This is the Asia betrayed by the prosperous Hong Kong, the orderly Singapore, the industrialized Japan, and by pseudo-democracy in most Asian countries. This is our Mother-Asia.</p>
<p class="indent">But our Mother-Asia has not lain prostrate before the tyranny of suffering. Suffering has given the peoples of Asia their history. True, it is the history of suffering and pain. But it is history. We remember the history of our own nation by the suffering our forebears went through. We feel history in our own person through the pain that disfigures the face of Asia today. We entrust our history to future generations, knowing that suffering and pain will fall upon them also. Suffering makes our history really historical. It makes our history truly contextual. It exhibits the saddest and ugliest in humanity, but it also calls forth the best and the strongest in us to create room in the space of pain and to strive for a new time of joy within the old time of mourning. History is not just dates and places. History is people. History is the story of how people live and die, love and hate, suffer and hope. If this is history, Asia has abundant history, as abundant as the enormous number of its inhabitants.</p>
<p class="indent">Here is a Thai song that tells us what the history of the people in Asia can be like:</p>
<a id="page_139"/>
<p class="poem">At dawn I rise<br/>Look at the earth, gaze<br/>at the sky.<br/>A farmer in the wind, I<br/>eat off the land.<br/>Unnumbered seasons pass.<br/>The fields<br/>crawl with our children.<br/>Ages that fade into each<br/>other<br/>undisturbed, now end.<br/>From cities come<br/>the men who think they're<br/>God—<br/>They scrape, they gouge<br/>and suck me out—<br/>my buffalo, my ox,<br/>the piece of earth I stand on;<br/>a landless beast that sells its sweat<br/>and gets just half of what it makes.<br/>Numbed, sick at heart I am<br/>a man no different from an ox.<br/>I wait for my luck to turn.<br/>I wait for fate to change.<br/>I starve and wait for earth<br/>and wait<br/>for heaven—<br/>fields overgrown with debts.<sup><a href="#fn10" id="ft10">10</a></sup></p>
<p class="indent">History happens when people's luck refuses to turn, when their fate shows no sign of change, and when their fields are overgrown with debts. History is not created by an ideology to change society. It is not forged by the messianic pretensions of religious and political leaders. History is hatched in people's suffering. It grows in their instinctive will to live and die as human beings and not as beasts. And it bursts into the world through people's power to hope.</p>
<p class="indent">Is this not true, Jesus? Leper looks up at the Jesus pietà anticipating a yes answer. But that Jesus stays silent. His mouth is shut tight. His eyes see not. His ears do not seem to catch the question. Leper feels a little embarrassed. Am I asking a stupid question? he wonders aloud. But the silence puzzles him. If only Jesus would break the silence and talk! Then his own suffering would be somehow bearable.</p>
<p class="indent">If all this talk about history does not move the gold-crowned Jesus, then what about culture? History is not separable from suffering. Culture, even more, cannot be separated from it. Culture is not just monuments commemorating <a id="page_140"/>national glory. Culture is not merely clean streets replacing dusty roads and high-rise buildings that have pushed slums out of tourists’ reach. Nor is culture to be identified solely with accepted social behaviors and conventions. <i>Culture is people, just as history is people</i>. Culture is what people do, say, sing, paint and write, to express their humanity, to release the emotions hidden in the depths of their hearts, to unburden the pain they carry in their souls, and to seek the meaning of the sufferings inflicted on their bodies.</p>
<p class="indent">Suffering is the soul of the culture of people. Culture is suffering and people wedded into union in a poem, in a painting, in a melody. Culture is people in suffering expressed in plastic art. Culture is the suffering of people portrayed in plays, dramas, puppet shows, and mask dances. And culture is people who turn suffering into the power to change their fate, to create their future, and to anticipate their destiny. There must then be culture in slums as well as in palaces, in a humble farmhouse as well as in a museum, in a roadside makeshift theatre as well as in an ornate opera house. There must be culture in protests against nuclear armaments, in demonstrations for human rights, in the fight for freedom and democracy. And there must also be culture in a revolution that struggles against the tyrannical power of social and political oppression. Culture, in a word, is the spirit of people crying out to be human, authentic and true. Culture is the image of God in humanity reaching for redemption, through symbols, words, imageries and actions.</p>
<p class="indent">There is a painting called “Prodigal Son” by an Indian artist, T. Chelladurai.<sup><a href="#fn11" id="ft11">11</a></sup> It depicts the moment when the father embraces his son. The painting shows the son in rags with an emaciated body and a bald head accentuated by a back revealing the ribs and by an elongated body from which all vitality seems to have gone. This is an appalling image of human suffering. The father, embracing this son, is almost over-shadowed by the enormity of the suffering. His face is completely buried in his son's shoulder. One cannot see it, but it must be streaming with tears. One of the arms however is on the son's back firmly pressing his son to himself. In contrast to the thin and bony back of the son, the father's arm is strong and powerful. It supports the son's frail body, affirming him, loving him, taking him into his heart and soul. What an arm! It is an arm of power, love, and life. And what an eloquent arm! It is an arm that creates the world and recreates it. It is an arm that gives birth to life and sustains it. It is an arm that will create life again and again and redeem it again and again till the end of time. Here is a culture that bursts out of the depth of the conflicts between God and humanity, out of struggles between human beings, and out of inner tensions that gnaw at our hearts and conscience. Culture, in whatever form, is the embodiment of such conflicts, struggles and tensions. That arm of power, love and life that embraces the prodigal son must have been the arm that embraced the dying Jesus on the cross. It must also be the arm that embraces men, women and children suffering <a id="page_141"/>from the inhumanity of war, the exploitation of body and soul, the humiliation of human persons through economic injustice and political oppression. That arm is the arm of God. Culture must be a confession of faith in that arm of God.</p>
<p class="indent">Is this not true, Jesus? Leper again asks. But he does not see in the gold-crowned Jesus this arm of God. What he sees is a gold crown making mockery of his misery, despising him for his poverty, repelled by the bad odor coming from his diseased body. The Jesus pietà with a golden crown represents a totally different culture. It is a culture without a soul. It is a heartless culture ridiculing human suffering and offering opium to distressed humanity. It is a culture without God. It is not the culture of people.</p>
<p class="indent">Suffering then is the cradle of history; it is the matrix of culture. In this kind of history and in this kind of culture people meet God and God meets people—God in people and people in God, touching life at its deepest level and grasping life in its most spiritual dimension. Is it not true that faith is born out of the embrace of God and humanity in suffering? Suffering contains in itself the seed of religious faith. And it is in Buddhism among Asian faiths and religions that this seed grows into the religious culture of the overwhelming number of people in Asia.</p>
<p class="indent">At the height of the Vietnam war the world was horrified at the sight of Buddhist monks burning themselves to death in Saigon streets. Most Christians did not understand this act of self-immolation. Even Martin Luther King, leader of the civil rights movements in the United States, did not seem to understand it. In a letter addressed to him, Nhat Hanh, a Vietnamese monk, said:</p>
<p class="blockquote">The self-burning of Vietnamese Buddhist monks in 1963 is somehow difficult for the Western Christian conscience to understand…. What the monks said in the letters they left before burning themselves aimed only at alarming, at moving the hearts of the oppressors and at calling the attention of the world to the suffering endured then by the Vietnamese…. There is nothing more painful than burning oneself. To say something while experiencing this kind of pain is to say it with utmost courage, frankness, determination and sincerity. During the ceremony of ordination, as practiced in the Mahayana tradition, the monk candidate is required to burn one, or more, small spots on his body in taking the vow to observe the 250 rules of a <i>bhikshu</i>, to live the life of a monk, to attain enlightenment and to devote his life to the salvation of all beings.<sup><a href="#fn12" id="ft12">12</a></sup></p>
<p class="indent">Self-immolation is not suicide, says the Vietnamese monk. It is not even a protest. It is an act done out of the deeply religious perception of life and the world as suffering and also out of the equally deeply religious commitment to work for the salvation of all suffering beings. Is this so difficult for us Christians to understand? It should not be. For at the heart <a id="page_142"/>of the cross in our faith is the suffering of him who laid down his life for suffering humanity.</p>
<p class="indent">At ordination a Buddhist monk undergoes the ceremony by burning—some spots on his body are burned. This is a symbolic act with profound meaning. The pain caused by the burning reminds the monk that life is suffering, that the world is pain. <i>Through the act the pain of humanity penetrates him</i>. The Buddhist ceremony of ordination is a <i>sacrament of pain</i>. The monk takes up the pain of the world and bears it on his body. It is said in the seventh-century Buddhist scripture:</p>
<p class="blockquote">All creatures are in pain, all suffer from bad and hindering karma…so that they cannot see the Buddhas or hear the law of Righteousness or know the Order…All that mass of pain and evil karma I take in my own body…I take upon myself the burden of sorrow; I resolve to do so; I endure it all. I do not turn back or run away, I do not tremble…I am not afraid…nor do I despair. Assuredly I must bear the burdens of all beings…I must set them all free…<sup><a href="#fn13" id="ft13">13</a></sup></p>
<p class="indent">This is Buddhist faith at its most sublime. There is a tremendous spirituality crying out of the depths of Asian suffering here. That spirituality comes from the confrontation of the Asian soul with the brutal reality of pain. To set human beings free from the bondage of such pain and suffering—this is the vow a Buddhist monk must take at the ordination. The distinction between salvation by faith and salvation by works does not really matter. The power of the human spirit to become free from pain and suffering is the divine power translated into the human power. The divine power to save gets expressed in the human power to endure. The divine compassion for the suffering multitudes becomes actualized in the human compassion to bear the burdens of karma for others. At this deepest level the Asian spirit that gives glimmers of light through, for example, Buddhist faith can and must move the heart of Jesus who bore the pain and suffering of the world and died on the cross.</p>
<p class="subhead"><b>WHO IS THE REAL JESUS?</b></p>
<p class="indent">But the gold-crowned Jesus does not seem interested in the Buddhist monks going through the painful ceremony of ordination. That Jesus bears no resemblance to Jesus crucified on the cross. Is he an imposter? Is he a pretender? Is he a fake? If he is an imposter who does not see why God has much to do with the history of Asia, then where is the real Jesus? If he is a pretender who stands for a God aloof from the culture of Asian peoples, then where can the real Jesus be? And if he is a fake incapable of the suffering spirituality of men and women in Asia, where must the real Jesus be found?</p>
<p class="indent">It at last begins to dawn on Leper that that gold-crowned Jesus is not <a id="page_143"/>the real Jesus. For him this is a very important discovery. He must bring Beggar, his fellow sufferer, to realize this. He puts a question to the latter: Who is Jesus? Beggar takes the question in jest. But even in jest the earnestness of the question becomes very poignant:</p>
<table cellpadding="0" cellspacing="0" style="padding-left:20px; padding-right:20px; margin-top:20px; margin-bottom:20px;" width="100%">
<col width="18%"/>
<col width="82%"/>
<tr>
<td valign="top">B<small>EGGAR</small>:</td>
<td valign="top">Your stomach has been empty for so long your head's become empty as well. Jesus is the one standing over there with open hands (points to statue). Now do you understand? See, that guy over there (points to the Jesus statue again).</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td valign="top">L<small>EPER</small>:</td>
<td valign="top">That's Jesus! You talk like the biggest fool in a village of fools. That's cement made to look like Jesus. That's not what I mean. I mean the real Jesus.</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td valign="top">B<small>EGGAR</small>:</td>
<td valign="top">Real Jesus. Who is the real Jesus?</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td valign="top">L<small>EPER</small>:</td>
<td valign="top">Do you know or don't you?</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td valign="top">B<small>EGGAR</small>:</td>
<td valign="top">Hell, if I knew, would I be squatting here with you, living like this in this shit? Do you have to act as a leftover cowhead?<sup><a href="#fn14" id="ft14">14</a></sup></td>
</tr>
</table>
<p class="indent">Who is the real Jesus? Beggar wants to know. If that cement Jesus with a gold crown is not the real Jesus, then who is?</p>
<p class="indent">This search for the real Jesus is soon to take an astonishing turn. Both Beggar and Leper must feel dumfounded when told that they must do something in order that Jesus can be the real Jesus! Of course that cement Jesus with a gold crown is not the real Jesus. That is the false Jesus adulterated by the riches of the world. That is the psuedo-Jesus venerated through pompous liturgy. That is the doctrinaire Jesus encased in a system of rigid doctrines. This Jesus has no taste for Asian culture. This Jesus cannot understand the meaning of Asian spirituality in suffering and in hope. This Jesus cannot make sense of Asian history filled with human tragedies and with divine compassion. In short, this Jesus is remote from history as people, culture as men, women and children, and religion as human persons.</p>
<p class="indent">The real Jesus and the people in suffering. The real Jesus and men and women striving for freedom, justice and democracy. The real Jesus and human persons longing for life, for eternal life. Here is the clue to the question of the real Jesus. Here is the secret of the historical Jesus. And here is an entry into the mystery of the Messiah who enables people to have faith in the God of love. Ordinary people like you and me, like Leper and Beggar, are part of this clue and this secret. This is the most exciting part of the quest for the real Jesus. The dramatic moment of the disclosure of this fresh insight arrives when the cement Jesus at long last opens his mouth and speaks to Leper:</p>
<p class="blockquote">I have been closed up in this stone for a long, long time,…entombed in this dark, lonely, suffocating prison. I have longed to talk with you, <a id="page_144"/>the kind and poor people like yourself, and share your suffering. I can't begin to tell you how long I have waited for this day,…this day when I would be freed from my prison, this day of liberation when I would live and burn again as a flame inside you, inside the very depths of your misery. But now you have finally come. And because you have come close to me I can speak now. You are my rescuer.<sup><a href="#fn15" id="ft15">15</a></sup></p>
<p class="indent">At last the real Jesus has spoken. The gold crown has vanished from his head. He now wears a crown of thorns. His emaciated face seems no longer able to hold back the passion of his pain. And his words are those of the dying Jesus on the cross, mustering the last drop of his strength, beseeching God for help: “My God, my God, why have you forsaken me?”</p>
<p class="indent">A very strange thing happens here—too strange for many of us to grasp, and so strange that those who know Jesus only as prophet, priest and king cannot comprehend. But the change is decisive. People must explain who Jesus is. People are to reveal where Jesus is. Jesus does not tell people why they suffer; it is the people who tell Jesus why he has to suffer. And people must liberate Jesus before Jesus can “burn again as a flame inside them.” The people who are determined to tell who Jesus is, to disclose where he is, and the people who struggle to liberate Jesus—Jesus calls them blessed:</p>
<p class="hanging2">How blessed are you who are in need; the kingdom of God is yours.</p>
<p class="hanging3">How blessed are you who now go hungry; your hunger shall be satisfied.</p>
<p class="hanging4">How blessed are you who weep now; you shall laugh. (Lk. 6:20-21)</p>
<p class="indent">God's kingdom is people who are no longer dehumanized by poverty. It is people who are not victimized by hunger any more. It is people who can now laugh because their human rights are restored, their political dissension is no longer a crime or sedition, and the voice of their conscience is heard as a voice from the soul of the nation.</p>
<p class="indent">“Because you have come close to me,” Jesus said to Leper, “I can speak now.” People come so close to Jesus that Jesus speaks the truth. Do you remember the story of the Roman centurion who had his servant cured by Jesus? As Matthew tells it (Matt. 8:5-13), the centurion came to Jesus, urgently requesting him to heal his servant. Jesus at once offered to go to his house with him. We would expect the centurion to accept Jesus’ offer without a moment's hesitation. Jesus was his last hope. On Jesus the life of his servant depended. We can almost see him running, dragging Jesus along with him. That is what you and I would do. But the centurion did what was totally unexpected. He said to Jesus: “Sir, who am I to have you under my roof? You need only say the word and the boy will be cured. I know, for I am myself under orders, with soldiers under me. I say to one, ‘Go,’ and he goes; to another ‘Come here,’ and he comes; and to my servant, ‘Do this,’ and he does it.” These words must have taken even Jesus by <a id="page_145"/>surprise. Here was a complete foreigner—a Roman soldier—telling him what he had never heard before. Jesus was in constant touch with his own people with a long tradition of strong faith. That faith came from Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, their most venerable ancestors. But he never heard them speak in this way. Jesus debated and argued with learned theologians and religious leaders who could speak glowingly about how Moses, their national leader par excellence, led the Operation Exodus out of Egypt. But they did not impress him with their faith.</p>
<p class="indent">What the Roman soldier was telling Jesus in all sincerity was something new and astonishing. It could not be understood within the framework of Jesus’ own religious tradition. It could not be explained by the faith handed down from Abraham, Isaac and Jacob. And it could not have come directly from the historical experience of the Exodus. But Jesus was above Abraham. He was greater than Moses. And he towered over his own religious tradition. To the deeply sincere words of the Roman centurion Jesus responded with equally deeply sincere words of admiration and affirmation: “I tell you this: nowhere, even in Israel, have I found such faith!” “Not even in Israel!” Jesus must have said this with a profound sense of wonder. Here in that foreigner he touched the humanity in the grip of God with whom Jesus identified himself. That Roman soldier must have reflected, however imperfectly, the kind of Christ, Messiah, to be imaged and to be acted out by Jesus.</p>
<p class="indent">Jesus constantly reaches into the hearts of the people and the people also come into touch with Jesus’ heart. In the story of the death of Lazarus (Jn. 11:1-44), to give another example, this reaching and this touching develop into reaching and touching the love of God, the source and power of life. Lazarus is dead. Jesus was told. The death of Lazarus and the extreme sorrow of his sisters must have confronted Jesus with the pain of emptiness and the horror of meaninglessness. Death makes a person into a thing. It turns the living life into dead memory. It marks the victory of decay over growth. It puts an end to hope and future; with death, hope vanishes and future ceases to exist. In the death of Lazarus Jesus stared at the abyss of void and darkness.</p>
<p class="indent">Four expressions in the story describe how deeply Jesus was touched by the death of Lazarus. He “sighed heavily” and “was deeply moved” when he heard the weeping of Mary and her companions (Jn. 11:33); he “wept” when they confirmed Lazarus’ death by offering to take him to the grave (11:34); and he “sighed deeply” when he went to the tomb (11:38). How could death destroy life? How could it render life so powerless? Jesus sighed heavily and deeply, the power of death to create fear and sorrow among the living and to make the world colorless and without joy—Jesus was deeply moved by that power. And standing in front of the tomb where life ceases and death reigns, Jesus wept. Death is the world where God is absent. Death is the power that vanquishes life. Death is the eternal pause and silence of life born in the midst of hope and excitement.</p>
<a id="page_146"/>
<p class="indent">Facing such death, was Jesus hearing an echo of his own cry of Godforsakenness on the cross? Was he muttering to himself: “It is finished,” his last words before the moment of his death? The death of Lazarus, the death of human beings, his own death, death of the creation, and death of God—for a moment Jesus must have felt a sinking into the abyss of death. All movement came to a standstill. All creation ceased to whisper, speak and sing through trees, birds, insects, mountains, rivers and human beings. Even God seemed to have fallen into deep silence. The only thing audible was the tomb—the tomb was heard in the weeping of the bereaved, in the sighing of the friends, in the solemn faces of the spectators. Death reigns through its tomb.</p>
<p class="indent">This must also be the death that deeply moved Gautama Sakyamuni, the Buddha to be, and made him sigh heavily and perhaps weep too. And this is also the death that moves each one of us profoundly, makes us sigh deeply and weep in bitterness and resignation. But Jesus finally broke the silence ruled by death. From his mouth these words rang out: “I am the resurrection and I am life” (Jn. 11:25). Life is pronounced out of the world seized by death. Resurrection is declared from the very place of death. Jesus’ message of life did not come from a paradise which does not know death. It came from Jesus who in his own death experienced the death of people. The Messiah of life sums up the will of people to life, and to live eternally.</p>
<p class="indent">The messianic contour of Jesus becomes sharpened as he absorbs more and more the struggle of people to live in faith, hope and love. God is the story of Jesus. And Jesus is the story of people. “Who is the real Jesus?” Beggar asked Leper. The real Jesus is not that cement Jesus pietà with a gold crown. The ready-made Jesus encased in a statue, enshrined in a cathedral, endorsed by church traditions and doctrines, is not the real Jesus. Jesus is the love of God that creates the miracle of life in the world. Jesus is the pain of God mingled with the pain of humanity. Jesus is the hope of God that people show in the midst of despair. Jesus is the eternal life of God which people live in the midst of death. Jesus is, lives, becomes real <i>when God and people reach for each other to bring about a new world out of the ruins of the old world</i>. Jesus is the event that takes place between God and humanity. Jesus is the light of God's salvation men and women kindle in the darkness of hell. And Jesus is that power of God's truth that more and more men and women in Asia manifest in front of the power of lies wielded by autocratic rulers.</p>
<p class="indent">Do you know a poem called “This Old Man” by Tere Tuakana of the South Pacific? It goes like this:</p>
<p class="poem">Surrounding an evening fire<br/>A group of children listen,<br/>They listen and listen to the words,<br/>The words of an old man.</p>
<a id="page_147"/>
<p class="poem">This old man he draws a story<br/>A story from the ashes,<br/>Together with the flickering fire.</p>
<p class="poem">This old man he weaves a story,<br/>A story from the fire,<br/>Together with the rising smoke</p>
<p class="poem">This old man he plants a story,<br/>A story of the past,<br/>And he plants it calmly.</p>
<p class="poem">The story rises with the smoke<br/>To plant itself in<br/>Minds that are green.<sup><a href="#fn16" id="ft16">16</a></sup></p>
<p class="indent">The calm and plain tone of this poem is deceptive. The story of “This Old Man” tells stories drawn from the ashes of the people killed on battlefields and destroyed in slums. It contains stories of men and women woven from the fire that consumes them. And it anticipates the stories of the children constructed on hope and not on despair, on humanity and not on brutality, on life and not on death, on resurrection and not on the cross. Is the story of “This Old Man” not our own story? And is it not in these stories of ours in Asia, stories of our past, our present and our future, that we meet the real Jesus?</p>
<p class="indent">In <i>Samurai</i> (Warrior), another major historical novel, after <i>Silence (Chinmoku)</i>, Shusaku Endo, a Japanese Catholic novelist, continues his search for a god who breaks the silence and speaks, and for a Jesus not alien to the life of people. He takes his readers back to the beginning of the seventeenth century when Japan made one of those sporadic attempts to test the waters of the world outside her. Samurai and his companions, accompanied by a Spanish Catholic priest as interpreter, set out on a long and futile journey across the seas to negotiate trade with Spain. With their efforts completely frustrated, they reached Mexico on their voyage home. There in a small village in Mexico they met again the secularized Japanese Catholic priest they had accidentally come into contact with a few years back on their outbound voyage. Old, weak and sick, that Japanese ex-priest appeared to be completely at home among the poor Indians with whom he had lived for years. He confided to the tired and dispirited warrior friends: “These Indians have stayed in this swampy place on account of me. Otherwise I would perhaps have left here and moved to a faraway place. In these Indians I catch the sight of Jesus from time to time.”<sup><a href="#fn17" id="ft17">17</a></sup> The Jesus that former Japanese priest caught sight of in the Indians was the real Jesus. Those Indians showed him where Jesus was and who Jesus was.</p>
<a id="page_148"/>
<p class="indent">The song sung at the beginning of the play “The Gold-Crowned Jesus” ended, if you remember, with these words:</p>
<p class="poem">Oh Jesus<br/>Now here with us<br/>Oh Jesus, with us.</p>
<p class="indent">This is a prayer. This is a plea. And this is also a confession of faith. The real Jesus is a matter of prayer and not a matter of dogma. The real Jesus evokes a plea and not an idea. And the real Jesus, when caught sight of, is the confession of faith, confessing that Jesus is Immanuel, God-with-us, in our brothers and sisters, however humble, here in Asia. In this sense and in this sense alone Christians can claim that Jesus Christ is the life of the world.</p>
<p class="subhead"><b>NOTES</b></p>
<p class="noteitem"><a href="#ft1" id="fn1">1</a>. See back cover, Kim Chi Ha, <i>The Gold-Crowned Jesus and Other Writings</i>, (Maryknoll, N.Y.: Orbis Books, 1978).</p>
<p class="noteitem"><a href="#ft2" id="fn2">2</a>. Ibid., pp. 85-87.</p>
<p class="noteitem"><a href="#ft3" id="fn3">3</a>. Ibid., p. 119.</p>
<p class="noteitem"><a href="#ft4" id="fn4">4</a>. See <i>No Place in the Inn, Voices of Minority Peoples in Asia</i> (Hong Kong: Christian Conference of Asia-Urban Rural Mission, 1979), pp. 32-33.</p>
<p class="noteitem"><a href="#ft5" id="fn5">5</a>. Ibid., p. 15.</p>
<p class="noteitem"><a href="#ft6" id="fn6">6</a>. Kuo Lu-Seng, “Believe in Life” in <i>Peking Spring and Other Selected Poems</i>, Wei Chin-Sheng, ed. (Hong Kong: P'ing Ming Publishing House, 1980), pp. 293-95 (translation from the Chinese original—CSS).</p>
<p class="noteitem"><a href="#ft7" id="fn7">7</a>. See <i>Struggling with People is Living with Christ</i> (Christian Conference of Asia—Urban Rural Mission, 1981), pp. 97-98.</p>
<p class="noteitem"><a href="#ft8" id="fn8">8</a>. Ibid., p. 99.</p>
<p class="noteitem"><a href="#ft9" id="fn9">9</a>. T. K. Thomas, ed., <i>Testimony Amid Asian Suffering</i> (Singapore: Christian Conference of Asia, 1977), p. 19.</p>
<p class="noteitem1"><a href="#ft10" id="fn10">10</a>. This song was printed in <i>Bangkok Post</i>, August 23, 1981, and reproduced in <i>In Clenched Fists of Struggle</i>, Report of the Workshop on the Impact of TNC's in Asia (Hong Kong: Christian Conference of Asia—Urban Rural Mission, 1981), p. 91.</p>
<p class="noteitem1"><a href="#ft11" id="fn11">11</a>. See Masao Takenaka, <i>Christian Art in Asia</i> (Tokyo: Kyo Bun Kwan, 1975), Plate 54.</p>
<p class="noteitem1"><a href="#ft12" id="fn12">12</a>. Thich Nhat Hanh, <i>Vietnam, the Lotus in the Sea of Fire</i> (London: SCM Press Ltd., 1967), pp. 117-18.</p>
<p class="noteitem1"><a href="#ft13" id="fn13">13</a>. Quoted from the Instructions of Akshayamati and the Sutra of Vajradhvaja. See <i>The Buddhist Tradition in India, China and Japan</i>, William Theodore de Bary, ed. (New York: Vintage Books, 1972), p. 84.</p>
<p class="noteitem1"><a href="#ft14" id="fn14">14</a>. Kim Chi Ha, <i>The Gold-Crowned Jesus</i>, p. 107.</p>
<p class="noteitem1"><a href="#ft15" id="fn15">15</a>. Ibid., pp. 121-22.</p>
<p class="noteitem1"><a href="#ft16" id="fn16">16</a>. See “Song of the Pacific,” <i>Risk</i> 12 (1976), p. 16.</p>
<p class="noteitem1"><a href="#ft17" id="fn17">17</a>. Shusaku Endo, <i>Samurai</i> (Tokyo: Shinchosha, 1980), pp. 279-80 (translation from the Japanese original—CSS).</p>
</div>
</body>
</html>