<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>chapter10</title>
<link href="ebook_style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
<meta content="urn:uuid:e628635c-8169-4333-a0b2-b0f205aae46e" name="Adept.expected.resource"/>
</head>
<body>
<div>
<a id="page_163"/>
<h2 class="chapternumber">10</h2>
<h2 class="chaptertitle"><big>J</big>esus and <big>P</big>eople (<big>M</big>injung)</h2>
<p class="chapterauthor1">BYUNG MU AHN</p>
<p class="indent">Chi-Ha Kim, a Korean poet, wrote a play titled <i>The Gold-Crowned Jesus</i>. The scene plays in front of a Catholic church, where a statue of Jesus, made of cement, is to be found. On his head he is wearing a golden crown. Below the statue there are beggars lying around. The time is early morning on a cold winter's day.</p>
<p class="indent">As time passes, first a pot-bellied priest and then a fat man, looking like the boss of a company, walk by. The beggars ask for alms again and again, but are refused with contempt and scorn. Eventually a policeman is seen on the scene. Far from wanting to help them he immediately tries to drive them out of the place and demands a fine from them in return for his connivance.</p>
<p class="indent">After all of them are gone, one of the beggars starts to lament: “I have neither home, nor grave to rest from all the exhaustion. I am abandoned in the midst of the cold winter, abandoned in an endless cold, in a bottomless darkness. I cannot endure it any longer, this miserable time…. It is unbearable, really unbearable. But where shall I go, where can I leave for, where, where?” As he so laments to himself in despair, his eyes, filled with tears, meet the cement statue of Jesus. For a moment a vague expectation flickers in his mind. Yet, pulling himself together he—with a critical glance at the statue—grumbles in his mind: “This Jesus might well be a saviour to those who have enough to eat, who have a home and a family. But what has he to do with a beggar like me?” And then he says in a loud voice: “Hey! How on earth can Jesus speak without a mouth? Can a lump of cement speak? Even though he were alive, he couldn't open his cemented mouth. So what kind of relationship could there be between that lump of cement and me?—Hey, listen! They choose cement or concrete or bronze or gold to have a statue of Jesus made, so solid as to last for 1000 or 10,000 years.”</p>
<a id="page_164"/>
<p class="indent">Crying out loudly, the beggar, overwhelmed with grief, begins to weep. Right at that moment he feels something wet, like small drops falling on his head. Is it raining? No!—When he look up he finds the cement Jesus weeping and dropping tears. The tears are falling right on him. “How strange a thing! Really, there are tears dropping down from his eyes! I could never have imagined a thing like this. Could it be that this cement is made of some strange material?”</p>
<p class="indent">He watches Jesus intently, and only then does he realize that Jesus is wearing a golden crown. He begins to touch and feel the crown with his hands. Having found that it is real gold, the idea crosses his mind that if he sold the crown, he would have enough to eat and something to live on. Following an irresistible impulse he grasps the crown and takes it off.</p>
<p class="indent">At this very moment he hears a voice: “Take it, please! For too long a time have I been imprisoned in this cement. Feeling choked in this dark and lonely prison of cement, I wish to talk with poor people like you and share your suffering. How eagerly I have been waiting for this day to come—the day of my liberation when I could once again flare up like a candle and bring light to your misery. Eventually you have come and made me open my mouth. It's you who saved me.” These are the words spoken by the gold-crowned Jesus.</p>
<p class="indent">“Who put Jesus into prison?” the startled and frightened beggar asks. “Who were they?” The Jesus made of cement answers: “People like the Pharisees did it, because they wanted to separate him from the poor in order to possess him exclusively.” Then the beggar asks: “Lord, what is it that has to be done for you to be released, for you to live again and stay with us?” Jesus answers: “It is impossible to do so by my own strength. If you are not going to liberate me, I will never become free again. Only people like you, that means the poor, the miserable, the persecuted, but kind-hearted people, will be able to do it. You opened my mouth! Right at that moment when you took the crown off my head, my mouth opened. It is you who liberated me! Now come near to me, come very close! Like you made me open my mouth, you may now make my body become free. Remove the cement from my body. And remove the golden crown too. For my head, a crown of thorns will just be enough. I do not need gold. You need it much more. Take the gold and share it with your friends.” But at that very moment the pot-bellied priest, the fat boss of the company, and the policeman reappear on the scene. Immediately they snatch the crown from the beggar's hands and put it back on the head of the Jesus-statue. The beggar is arrested by the policeman and, charged with larceny, taken to the police station. And the Jesus, made of cement, returns to his former state—a blank, expressionless statue, dumb, nothing more than a lump of cement.</p>
<p class="indent">Chi-Ha Kim is a lay Catholic. However, he is not a so-called enthusiastic believer. He is unable to submit to the teachings of the Church, for he not only realizes that there is too wide a gap between those teachings and the <a id="page_165"/>realities he lives in, but sees the so-called dogma (doctrines) as a barrier that has sealed off our eyes from the realities.</p>
<p class="indent">The very thing that makes Jesus turn into cement is the Christology made by the Church. The golden crown on his head is the ideology of the established Church, which was forced on Jesus in order to make him support the Church institution. Today, the Korean Church boasts of the 200th anniversary of the Catholic Church and the 100th anniversary of the Protestant Church. But actually, both churches have only presented the petrified image of Jesus created by the dogma formed in Europe throughout the long history of the Western Church. And accordingly, the Jesus who wants to share the agony and the suffering of the Minjung of this land has long been imprisoned in the cement made by them.</p>
<p class="indent">The cries of the Minjung, however, who have been groaning under the military dictatorship during the decade of the 1970s took off the crown of Jesus. So we, for the first time, came to hear his voice and see his tears. That is to say, we experienced that Jesus, confined in the cement, could be liberated only by the Minjung. But now the Church, just like the priest, the boss, and the policeman, is trying hard to re-capture the crown in order to put it back on the head of Jesus. Becoming aware of the existence and realities of the Minjung in the Gospels, we theologians started to see them coinciding with what we experienced in our own situation. To our eyes, the Jesus seen through the lens of traditional Christology was the very Jesus imprisoned in the cement. To liberate or save Jesus from this state of imprisonment was recognized and accepted by some of our biblical scholars as an immediate task. But this task cannot be fulfilled by the intellectual analysis of the Bible only. It needs the help of the Minjung as well.</p>
<p class="subhead"><b>THE CHRIST OF THE KERYGMA AND THE HISTORICAL JESUS</b></p>
<p class="indent">Even up to the present time the New Testament scholars of the West are giving preference to the Christ of the Kerygma in comparison with the historical Jesus. They stress that it is the Christ of the Kerygma who gives the foundation to the Gospels. On this promise they even say that it is an attitude of disbelief to inquire beyond the Kerygma, and accordingly they block the way to the historical Jesus. Some objections to this opinion, being based on the historicity, are only roaming around skepticism so far as the historical Jesus is concerned. It is true that the Christ of the Kerygma is dominant in the New Testament. And this fact serves as the basis for the Christology and the doctrine of salvation. However, although the existence of the historical Jesus is assumed (presupposed) in the Christology and the doctrine of salvation, it is almost entirely overshadowed. In other words, Christology plays the role of confining the living Jesus to the cement. This fact can be ascertained in all of the Gospels, not to speak of the Epistles of Paul.</p>
<p class="indent">It is a well-known fact that Paul, when he formulated his Christology, <a id="page_166"/>did not refer to the historical Jesus. He even had no interest in him (2 Cor. 5:16). In his Christology the Jesus who lived in Palestine doesn't exist, only the Christ as an object of worship. The Jesus who cannot speak and cannot move under the weight of the golden crown—he is the Christ of the Kerygma. The Kerygma, too, refers to the death on the cross, yet it actually dehistorised that event, in spite of its historical reality. The same can be said about the historical event of the resurrection of Jesus, which was dehistorised by the Kerygma as well. We do know that this phenomenon of dehistorisation began in 1 Cor. 15:3-8 and Phil. 2:6-11; the so-called Christ-hymn, for example, was formulated by the Christian community before Paul. It is clear that these are confessions on the suffering and the resurrection of Jesus, but the actual substance was dehistorised long before. That is, the historical facts of “when, where, by whom, how and why” Jesus was executed were entirely concealed in the Kerygma. The <i>Christology in this Kerygma has greatly served as an ideology to preserve the Church, but at the cost of silencing Jesus</i>. Who took the leading role in the formation of the Christ-Kerygma? It was the leaders of the early Church. They, in an apologetic effort to preserve the Church, endeavoured to formulate the Kerygma. But this effort only resulted in the abstraction of the Jesus-event.</p>
<p class="indent">But besides the Kerygma, the stories about Jesus were transmitted as well. Jesus in those stories is entirely different from the Christ in the Kerygma. He is not the gold-crowned Jesus who rules, but the Jesus who wants to associate with people, uses the same language, and shares their joy and their sorrow. It was the author of the Gospel of Mark who handed down to us these Jesus-stories. But even in the Gospel of Mark the Christ of the Kerygma is given as a premise (presupposition). However, the author did by no means conceal the features of the living Jesus before he became the Christ.</p>
<p class="indent">The Jesus stories describe the <i>living</i> Jesus—the Jesus who returned to Galilee as soon as he heard the news about the arrest of John the Baptist; the Jesus who was rejected by his native town; the Jesus who lived with the poor, the sick and the women, healing them, feeding them, and defending them in their resistance against the ruling class who persecuted, oppressed and alienated them; and the Jesus who finally was killed by the hands of the political authorities.</p>
<p class="indent">It is clear that “non-Christ-Kerygma” elements are predominant in the Jesus-stories. But who then were the transmitters of those stories? It is obvious that they belonged to quite a different class than those who formed the Kerygma. In my point of view it was Minjung who transmitted the stories about Jesus. They must have circulated the stories about the event of Jesus’ execution by the Roman authorities continuously. Jesus was the victim of political violence, and because of this situation, the stories about the Jesus-event could not, but must, have been handed down secretly in the form of “rumor.” The stories had been overshadowed by the Kerygma until the time when the author of the Gospel of Mark accepted and transformed the <a id="page_167"/>rumors of the Minjung into a manuscript. We owe it to the editor of the Gospel of Mark that the living feature of Jesus was preserved and handed down to us! Otherwise it might have been lost forever.</p>
<p class="indent">The Jesus who was imprisoned in the cement and could not help keeping silent under the weight of the golden crown was liberated by the Minjung. Freed from the heavy crown and the prison of cement, he speaks and works among us.</p>
<p class="subhead"><b>JESUS AND THE MINJUNG</b></p>
<p class="indent">Because we have been enslaved by the Christology of the Kerygma, even when we read the synoptics, we focused our attention on Jesus as the Christ and considered him to be the center of the Gospel. In this way we used to identify Jesus with the Christ and were quite content with this identification. However, as we began to read the synoptics again with more skeptical eyes, the features of Jesus turned out to be quite different.</p>
<p class="indent">First, we found out that Jesus is in incessant action. Unlike the Christ of the Kerygma, Jesus is not holding fast to his unshakable seat (throne) within the Church. By no means is he ruling as an original perfect being, but acts freely without being bound to religious norms. This image of Jesus is quite different from such images as the Son of God, the Messiah, the pre-existent Being, the exalted Christ sitting on a throne, and the coming Christ who will be the Judge on the last day, etc.</p>
<p class="indent">Secondly, Jesus associates and lives with the Minjung. On no account is he an aloof, lofty person, but instead he eats and drinks with the Minjung, sometimes asking favors from them or vice versa, granting their requests. So we can say: “Where there is Jesus, there is the Minjung. And where there is the Minjung, there is Jesus.”</p>
<p class="indent">The Gospel of Mark from its very beginning (1:22) points to the crowd who is gathering around Jesus and reports that the anonymous crowd is always in company with him. By so doing, the author of the Gospel attracts our attention to the anonymous crowd and finally makes it clear that this crowd is in fact <i>ochlos</i> (2:4) itself. And afterwards it continues to report that Jesus is surrounded by and living together with this <i>ochlos</i> all through his life.</p>
<p class="indent">The term <i>ochlos</i> occurs 38 times in the Gospel of Mark, is used 49 times by Matthew and 41 times by Luke. Now our question is this: Why did the authors of the Gospels prefer to use this term when describing the characteristics of the crowd who lived together with Jesus? The Septuaguint uses the term <i>laos</i>—meaning God's people—instead of <i>ochlos</i> when it reports about the crowd. Mark also knew the term <i>laos</i>, but he used it only twice and then only when quoting. It is, therefore, evident that Mark deliberately used the term <i>ochlos</i> for the characterization of the crowd who gathered around Jesus, because he recognized that the characteristics of <i>ochlos</i> exactly corresponded to those of the crowd around Jesus.</p>
<a id="page_168"/>
<p class="indent">According to the Gospels, numerous <i>ochlos</i> associated with and shared the activities of Jesus. According to the Feeding Story in the Gospel of Mark, for example, the number amounts to 5,000 (6:44). This number, however, must be regarded as a symbolic figure to show how big a crowd of <i>ochlos</i> gathered around Jesus. It was an anonymous force. Mark described <i>ochlos</i> in detail.</p>
<p class="indent">First, there are the sick. According to the redaction-order of Mark there is a man with an unclean spirit (1:21ff. 34), a leper (1:40 ff), a paralysed man (2:1 ff), a man with a withered hand (3:1 ff), and so on. And in the healing stories that follow, Mark shows that the sick persons held an important position among the <i>ochlos</i> of Jesus. And especially when he frequently refers to the many people who were possessed by unclean spirits, he describes Jesus as an “exorcist” who liberated them from the evil spirits.</p>
<p class="indent">Second, there are the tax-collectors and the sinners. They are the ones who concretely reflect the character of the Minjung. For example, in the beginning of Mark's Gospel we find the story about the calling of Levi. The following passage deserves our attention: “And as he passed on, he saw Levi the son of Alphaeus sitting at the tax office, and he said to him, ‘Follow me.’ And he rose and followed him. And as he sat at table in his house, many tax collectors and sinners were sitting with Jesus and his disciples; for there were many who followed him” (2:14, 15).</p>
<p class="indent">There is a parallel to this passage in the Q-source (Mt 11:19; Lk 15:1). When Matthew refers to the tax-collectors and the prostitutes side by side (Mt 21:31), he wants to emphasize that he regards the tax-collectors specially to be the members of Jesus’ Minjung. Here Minjung clearly means those who are socially alienated.</p>
<p class="indent">The tax-collectors, the sinners, and the prostitutes—all of them belong to the alienated class. Thirdly, the Minjung of Jesus were the poor. <i>Hoi ptōchoi</i> are the poor people in the materialistic sense of the word. Therefore, we can never think of Jesus without taking into consideration this “ethos of poverty.”</p>
<p class="indent">It is a well-known fact that in Luke especially, Jesus’ words about the poor stand out in bold relief, and the poor are characterized by the contrast between them and the rich. Fourthly, what we must point out, in particular, is the appearance of women on the scene. In the Gospels women appear here and there as patients or poor persons, but what is most important is that they are referred to as those who observed Jesus’ suffering right to the end and became eyewitnesses to the empty tomb. This tells us something about the importance of the women's position among the Minjung who followed Jesus.</p>
<p class="indent">The question we have to raise here in connection with the Christology is that about the relation between Jesus and <i>ochlos</i>.</p>
<p class="indent">Traditional Christology has been consistent in its explanation of seeing Jesus’ role within the frame of God's drama. That is to say, Jesus is the true Messiah in the sense that he obeyed and fulfilled God's will. In the <a id="page_169"/>Gospels, of course, similar ideas can be found. In the Passion-history, for example, Jesus’ agony at Gethsemane and his cry on the cross reflect such an image of Jesus. But we do have another tradition, which conveys an absolutely different image of Jesus, who identifies himself with the cries and wishes of the suffering Minjung. It is particularly the healing-stories that expose this image of Jesus. The Jesus who heals the sick people is by no means described as someone who fulfills a pre-established program. Jesus never seeks for the sick persons voluntarily, nor does he follow an earlier intention (plan) for helping them. On the contrary, the request always comes from the Minjung's side first. And accordingly, Jesus’ healing activities appear as him being obedient to the wishes of the patients. In other words, it is the sick who take the initiative for such events to happen. Jesus’ healing power, which has a functional relation to the suffering of the Minjung, can be realized only when it is met by the will of the Minjung. It is from this aspect that Mark reports, without hesitation, that Jesus could do no mighty works in his native town, because they did not believe in him (6:5).</p>
<p class="indent">Jesus, sharing the living realities of the sick, the poor, the alienated, and the women, speaks to God on behalf of the Minjung, as if he was their spokesman.</p>
<p class="indent">To distinguish this point from traditional Christology, let's take the parable of the Good Samaritan in the Gospel of Luke as an example. The allegorical interpretation of this parable—which has been traditional interpretation—identifies the good Samaritan with Jesus. We can for the moment accept this interpretation, but it overlooks one important point: the central figure in the event of this parable is not the good Samaritan, but it is the man who fell among the robbers. The deed of the good Samaritan is the response to the cry of the suffering man. However, the priest and the Levite who were also confronted with this cry for help did not open themselves, but passed quickly by instead. The one who did open himself to the cry was the good Samaritan. Consequently, in order to correctly interpret Jesus as the Christ, we must endow <i>ochlos</i> in the Gospels with the proper esteem with regard to their relationship with Jesus. <i>This Jesus is not the Christ who is facing man from God's side, but the Christ who is facing God from man's side</i>. So in this case it means that <i>man</i> is not an abstract being but the concrete Minjung who are suffering. Therefore, the Jesus who is one with the Minjung, facing God from their direction—HE IS CHRIST. He identifies himself with the Minjung. He exists for no other than for the Minjung (cf. Mk 2:17).</p>
<p class="indent">Now, is Jesus as the Christ the Saviour of mankind? If so, salvation is not a manufactured product given to man from heaven to possess. On the contrary, it means the salvation that Jesus realized in the action of transforming himself, by listening to and responding to the cry of Minjung.</p>
<p class="indent">This understanding of salvation is to be found in the Gospel of Luke when he speaks about poverty or the poor. It seems to me that Luke's <a id="page_170"/>understanding of the Minjung lies in its emphasis on the poor. Luke pictures the poor in relief on the one hand, and casts severe criticism upon the rich on the other hand. This, however, does not mean that Luke puts the emphasis on the class struggle that the communists advocate. We must notice that the audience was most of the time the rich people, whether his passages deal with the rich or with the poor. This means that the purpose of Jesus’ preaching was not simply to curse the rich and to proclaim a blessing to the poor, but to pronounce the “paradox”—that the way to salvation of the rich can only be found through the poor As a matter of fact, Jesus himself was one of the poor (Mt 8:20; Lk 9:58), and therefore we can meet him only among the poor. Luke emphasizes this point.</p>
<p class="indent">This is the very aspect from which we should understand the relationship between Jesus and the Minjung. And this also means that we should not understand Jesus as an “individual” as the Western scholars do. Such a Western point of view cannot but turn into a metaphysical Christology. No, we should rather understand the Jesus of the Gospels as a “collective” being. That is to say, we must grasp Jesus as the Minjung itself. In the Gospel of Mark, when Jesus was looking around on those <i>ochlos</i> who sat around him, he proclaimed, “These are my mother and my brothers”! (Mk 3:31ff). This clearly presents Jesus as being part of the Minjung itself. From this point of view. the meaning of the Passion-history appears different too.</p>
<p class="subhead"><b>JESUS’ SUFFERING AS THE CORE OF THE CHRISTOLOGY</b></p>
<p class="indent">1) Even though the cross of Jesus is undoubtedly a historical event, in the so-called Kerygma it became dehistorised and was consequently reduced to a religious symbol which, in the end, became the object of worship. Those who gave first priority to the Christ-Kerygma were interested in the meaning of the cross only. The emphasis on the soteriological meaning is one such case. Just as Paul did in 1 Cor. 15:3ff, they understand the event of the cross in terms of the fulfillment of God's will (according to the “scriptures”), or in terms of a sacrificial offering for the sin of mankind. It is these two meanings, which are the keynotes in Paul's Christology, that we are soaked with. And this Christology has been ruling over us as the dogma supported by Church authority. Yet, even in Paul's writings, expressions which go beyond the meaning of “he died for our sins” can be found. That is to say, Paul does not simply mention Jesus’ death, but expresses it in terms of the death on the cross. But if this cross was the means for the execution, then it is not a symbol for death, but serves as an evidence to the killing or the case of murder. Consequently, to emphasize the cross, instead of simply mentioning his death, presents evidence to the historical event that took place. Then, why on earth does Paul keep silent on the historical questions of “when? where? by whom? how?” It might be said that the social situation of his days made him do so.</p>
<p class="indent">The cross, which has been put up by the church as its symbol, has no <a id="page_171"/>meaning except that of playing the role of a religious symbol. And traditional Christology, up to the present, kept repeating such an ecclesiastical understanding of Jesus’ death.</p>
<p class="indent">Luther conceptualized the event of Jesus’ suffering as the so-called apostolic Gospel (<i>apostolisches Evangelium</i>). But because of this it was rather reduced to merely the criterion by which to judge the doctrine of the cross. In the same way the cross became the backbone of the doctrine of the Kerygmatic Christology. As a result, the event of the cross lost its relationship with the reality of today's suffering, and accordingly the cross without such relationship began to reign on the throne of the Church. In other words the cross of Jesus has been turned into cement. <i>This petrified cross does no longer associate with the suffering people, but does serve as a dogma to interrogate and judge the sinners</i>.</p>
<p class="indent">2) What about Mark's description of the Passion-history?</p>
<p class="indent">First of all, we must admit that the Christ-kerygmatic elements can be found in that history in the respect that Mark describes Jesus’ suffering as the necessary stage to pass through “in order to fulfil God's will”. The prayer in Gethsemane, the trial of Jesus and the last cry on the cross—all of these are described as if God, not the Roman authorities, nor the Jewish ruling class, put Jesus to death. These elements, of course, make only a small part of the Gospel, though.</p>
<p class="indent">Bultmann assumes that the story about the suffering of Jesus was formed by being based on the so-called Passion-announcements. This assumption reveals that his standpoint advocates the predominance of the Kerygma over the Jesus-event. But this opinion does not correspond to the facts with regard to the two following points:</p>
<p class="indent">First, the announcement says that Jesus will be rejected by the elders and the chief priests and the scribes, and be killed. But the Passion-history reports that not only the Jewish ruling class but also the Roman authorities executed him. Therefore, it is a stern reality that he was killed as a political prisoner by the Roman power. Moreover, the great crowd in Jerusalem and even his disciples turned their back on him.</p>
<p class="indent">Second, what is most important to be aware of is that there is not a single hint about an immediate resurrection anywhere in the Passion-histories, while in the Passion-announcements the prediction that he will rise after three days is a major presupposition. The Passion-history reveals the naked reality of the darkness that prevailed under the rule of the unjust power. And even God seemed to have turned away and did not intervene in the event of the execution of Jesus. The severe reality in fact was the reality of God's absence.</p>
<p class="indent">Besides, the Passion stories do not contain any hint as to the existence of a “superman”. Jesus appears as nothing more than a weak person who has the same physiological limitations as common people do, and he, just like the powerless Minjung today, was cruelly killed by the strong power of the structural evil of the world. The Passion-history by no means indicates <a id="page_172"/>the justification of man's sin in general (if we set aside the scene of “The Last Supper”). On the contrary, it exposes—through the reports of the event of Jesus’ crucifixion—the immorality and sin of the offenders.</p>
<p class="indent">3) To come to a conclusion, we must deal with the question as to how this story about the suffering of Jesus could be passed on. Most of all I would like to insist on the presupposition that the Passion-history was based on historical facts. Without the recognition of the historical reality, we cannot imagine the feature of the Jesus of Galilee who was persecuted and eventually killed on the cross. This does not mean that I deny the fact that the theological thinking had some effect on the process of documentation of the Passion-history. But strictly speaking, the Kerygmatic theology did not exist first, but was preceded by the testimony of the eye-witnesses to the event of Jesus’ death on the cross. If not so, the description of the procedure of the suffering cannot be seen as the non-religious and human tragedy that it actually was. This very feature of Jesus, who so humanly suffers, tears the Kerygmatic Christology to pieces. Who then was interested in this feeble and human Jesus and transmitted the facts about how he was helplessly killed on the cross by the power of the authorities?</p>
<p class="indent">If the transmitters had been members of the leading class in the church, who wanted to preserve the Kerygmatic doctrine—“Jesus is the Christ, Jesus is the Son of God, He is the Saviour who conquered the world”—the Passion-history could never have been described in the way it was. At the same time, the Passion-history in its original form reflects none of these elements whatsoever. On the contrary, it was about people whose lives were so full of suffering and misery that they could not even stop at pondering about Church order, its doctrines, and the like. They could not afford to have apologetic interests. Therefore, we can conclude that it was not the leading class of the Church who transmitted the Passion-history, but the nameless, weak and suffering people—the Minjung. They saw their own existential life situation coincide with the story of Jesus’ suffering. Therefore they told the story about the Jesus-event not as his story, but as their own story. And as they mourned Jesus’ death, they mourned their own death at the same time. By doing so, they exposed the evil and unjust power and resisted it.</p>
<p class="indent">The author of the Gospel of Mark seems to have pursued two goals when he documentized Minjung testimony: on the one hand he challenged the Kerygmatic Christology, which had already been generally accepted, and on the other hand he, with some conciliatory attitude, tried to harmonize their testimony with that of the Kerygmatic Christology.</p>
<p class="indent">For these various aspects we can see that it is the Minjung of Jesus who open the way to liberate Jesus, still imprisoned in the cement of the dogma, and make him return to the very place where the Minjung today are living.</p>
</div>
</body>
</html>