<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>chapter15</title>
<link href="ebook_style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
<meta content="urn:uuid:e628635c-8169-4333-a0b2-b0f205aae46e" name="Adept.expected.resource"/>
</head>
<body>
<div>
<a id="page_247"/>
<h2 class="chapternumber">15</h2>
<h2 class="chaptertitle"><big>J</big>esus <big>C</big>hrist in <big>P</big>opular <big>P</big>iety in the <big>P</big>hilippines</h2>
<p class="chapterauthor1">SALVADOR T. MARTINEZ</p>
<p class="indent">Andres Cruz is in his fifties. He drives a jeepney fourteen hours a day, seven days a week, to support his wife and five children. His daily earnings of twenty-five pesos are hardly sufficient to buy food for his hungry family. But he has a <i>panata</i> (vow) to buy a garland of <i>sampaguitas</i> (jasmine) every day to decorate the image of the Black Nazarene which hangs on the windshield of his vehicle. He fulfills his promise unfailingly. Also, every Friday afternoon he goes to Quiapo Church, lights a few candles, recites the rosary, wipes the feet of the image of the Black Nazarene with a towel which he wraps around his neck all day. He believes that some power is transferred from the image to the towel and carrying it on his body will bring him luck and protect him from harm. He keeps another towel in his house, one that has touched the sacred image on its special feast day in January, to guarantee the good health and happiness of his family.</p>
<p class="indent">My primary task here is to describe how the majority of Filipinos think of Christ. Andres Cruz belongs to that majority. “Majority” here refers to Filipinos, usually Roman Catholics,<sup><a href="#fnr1" id="fn1">1</a></sup> who are poor, rural, and have had minimal or no education They practice folk Catholicism. Their religious observances, from the ordinary Sunday mass to the elaborate town fiesta, which in the first place were of Spanish folk origin, are embellished with local customs and traditions.</p>
<p class="indent">Jaime Bulatao, a Jesuit psychologist, describes Philippine Christianity as “split-level,” which he defines “as the co-existence within the same person of two or more thought-and-behavior systems which are inconsistent with each other.”<sup><a href="#fnr2" id="fn2">2</a></sup> The inconsistency may not be perceived by the person or it is pushed “into the rear portions of consciousness.” It is taken for granted <a id="page_248"/>and forgotten. Hence, neither the feeling of inconsistency nor of hypocrisy arises.</p>
<p class="subhead"><b>BEGINNINGS OF CHRISTIANITY</b></p>
<p class="indent">Christianity came to the Philippines with Ferdinand Magellan in 1521. On an Easter Sunday, March 31st of that year, the first mass was celebrated on the island of Limasawa. Many became followers of Magellan's faith. They were convinced that the “thunder and lightning” from his ships’ cannons were a display of the power of his gods.</p>
<p class="indent">In the island of Cebu, Magellan made further advancement for Christianity. Christianization, he felt, was the perfect way to strengthen the link between Spain and the newly conquered islands. The process was facilitated by three factors: fear, materialism and sex. First, the people were afraid that they would be destroyed if they refused to embrace the faith of their conquerors. Indeed, Pigafetta, Magellan's chronicler, wrote: “As handkerchiefs wipe off the sweat, so did our arms overthrow and destroy our adversaries and those who hate our faith.” Secondly, they believed that the religion of the foreigners was the source of their power and might. Magellan in fact promised Rajah Humabon, the island chief, that if he became a Christian he would become more powerful and would be invulnerable. Thirdly, Magellan tried to control the sexual activities of his crew by denouncing as mortal sin any sexual affair with pagan women. Hence, to appease God's wrath, Magellan's men zealously made it their mission to convert the native women and artlessly baptized those whom they fancied. In a week's time, King Humabon, his whole household and 800 of his subjects were baptized by the fleet's chaplain. As a baptismal gift, the Queen was given a wooden statue of the Child Jesus. Pigafetta wrote that upon seeing the statue, “she was overcome with contrition and asked for baptism amid her tears…(later) she asked to give her the little Child Jesus to keep in place of her idols.”<sup><a href="#fnr3" id="fn3">3</a></sup></p>
<p class="subhead"><b>RELIGIOUS PRACTICES OF PRE-SPANISH FILIPINOS</b></p>
<p class="indent">Before going any further, a brief look at the religious beliefs and practices of the early Filipinos would be helpful.</p>
<p class="indent">Four hundred years is a very long time. It would seem that the beliefs and practices of the early Filipinos, indeed, their native identity, would have been removed and erased by colonization and “Christianization,” first by Spain and then by America. Yet, they persist. They were woven into the religion imposed on them by their colonizers. As one historian argued:</p>
<p class="blockquote">The Filipinos were no mere passive recipients of the cultural stimulus created by the Spanish conquest. Circumstances gave them considerable freedom in selecting their responses to Hispanisation. Their <a id="page_249"/>response varied all the way from acceptance to indifference and rejection. The capacity of Filipinos for creative social adjustment is attested by the manner in which they adapted many Hispanic features to their own indigenous culture.<sup><a href="#fnr4" id="fn4">4</a></sup></p>
<p class="indent">The pre-Spanish Filipinos believed in a Supreme Being, <i>Bathala</i>,<sup><a href="#fnr5" id="fn5">5</a></sup> who is Lord of all, the all-powerful <i>maykapal</i> (creator or maker of all things). Bathala lives up in the sky. He is represented on earth by <i>anitos</i>. There are varieties of <i>anitos</i> and they are assigned to specific offices: there are <i>anitos</i> who are assigned to help the farmers and protect their fields; there are <i>anitos</i> of fishing and navigation; there are <i>anitos</i> of the battlefield, of diseases, of the sucking child, of nursing mothers and <i>anitos</i> of lovers and of generations.</p>
<p class="indent">Like their Asian neighbors, the early Filipinos also practiced ancestor worship. They deified their dead ancestors, gave them <i>anito</i> stature and attributed divine powers to them. They called upon them to intercede on their behalf with Bathala. They preserved their memory in <i>larawan</i> or <i>likha</i>, images made of wood, bone, ivory or gold and they offered food, wine, gold ornaments and invocations before them.</p>
<p class="indent">The rites and rituals of sacrifices and thanksgiving were performed by priests and priestesses (<i>katalona</i>). They were actually witches and sorcerers. In addition, there were lesser priests or quasi-priests who performed various incantations and witchcrafts.</p>
<p class="indent">Some of these beliefs and practices are still held by many Catholic, especially rural, Christians. This leads to the question by some scholars as to whether there is Christianity (or Catholicism) as such in the Philippines. Comments Juan Francisco,</p>
<p class="blockquote">For we can say without being accused of partiality that much if not all of the indigenous religious practices were unclothed of their native garments, and then garbed with the accepted Christian (or Catholic) habiliments, which made it possible for the <i>Indios</i> to be converted easily. But the conversion was not substantial, for it was only a change of garments.</p>
<p class="indent">The first Filipino converts to Catholicism substituted veneration of saints for the <i>magaanito</i> rituals and replaced their <i>anitos</i> with images of the Christian saints. So, as there were <i>anitos</i> for every human activity, there are now saints for specific favors: a saint for sterile mothers to pray to, one for finding a good husband, another for finding lost objects, and so on.</p>
<p class="subhead"><b>DEVOTION TO THE INFANT JESUS</b></p>
<p class="indent">Historians speculate that the Santo Nino image given to the Queen of Cebu on the occasion of her baptism and which she kept “in place of her <a id="page_250"/>idols” was the very image that was found by one of the soldiers of Legaspi in an unburned house of a fleeing Cebuano native in 1565. Legaspi considered the discovery a good omen, a sure sign that his mission to spread Christianity and establish a Spanish colony in the Far East would succeed. On the spot where the image was found he ordered a chapel and the first Spanish settlement in the Philippines to be built. The image was enshrined in the main altar, and the settlement was dedicated to the blessed name of Jesus. When the natives returned to the city and saw that their <i>Balahala</i>, as they called the image, was equally revered by the Spaniards, they became friendly with them. The <i>Balahala</i>, they testified, had been their protector for many years.</p>
<p class="indent">Since then the Santo Nino has been venerated by the people of Cebu. It has become the symbol of protection in times of hardship: drought, disease, hunger, fire and war.</p>
<p class="indent">Through the years many tales have been told about the numerous miracles of the Santo Nino. It is said to have checked an epidemic in 1572 and in the succeeding years brought an end to a drought, helped to win a battle, saved a ship and her passengers from sinking, spared the city from burning. Practical jokes have also been attributed to it: that it has come down from its pedestal to take a walk, to buy fish in the market, and at one time, to enlist in the army.</p>
<p class="indent">On every second Sunday after Epiphany, the feast of the Santo Nino has been celebrated since Legaspi's time. The main feature of the feast is the <i>sinulog</i>. It is a dance patterned after Muslim ceremonial dances and performed by the pilgrims purportedly to offer praise and supplications to the Santo Nino. The origin of the practice is unclear. The legend is that it was first performed after a Muslim raid of the Visayas. In the attack, it is believed that the Santo Nino made the island of Cebu invisible to the enemies.</p>
<p class="indent">The <i>sinulog</i> is danced following the high mass. With blaring drum music in the background, pilgrims from all walks of life begin dancing at the courtyard into the sanctuary, inching their way to the altar with shouts of thanksgiving and petition to “Pit Senor,” as the image is popularly called. The dancing goes on for several hours, from mid-morning till late in the afternoon. When the dancers reach the altar, they kiss the image and touch it with their handkerchiefs, rosaries and other articles, which they believe acquire healing powers.</p>
<p class="indent">Devotion to the Holy Child is not limited to the people of Cebu. It has spread throughout the archipelago in the same way that the Infant of Prague has gained devotees in Europe in the 17th century. Santo Nino is the patron saint of the cities of Tacloban, Iloilo, Cadiz, two districts of Manila (Pandacan and Tondo), and many towns all over the Philippines. The towns of Kalibo, Kabankalan, Cadiz, Iloilo, and Bacolod have their own versions of the <i>sinulog</i>. In these places, the Mardi Gras-like festivals have become a tourist attraction. The preparation for them is long, elaborate <a id="page_251"/>and expensive. “Tribes” (actually composed of peasant workers of the big sugar haciendas) compete with each other for prizes for the best or the most original float, costume, dance steps, cheers, beat, etc.</p>
<p class="indent">The <i>sinulog</i>, or <i>ati-atihan</i>, or <i>dinagyang</i>, may have lost some of its original religious significance. But to many pilgrims it remains more than just a dance or just a simulation of the battles between the Christians and the Muslims. As one psychologist puts it: “It is the creative expression, the serious enactment of a true-to-life situation: a cry of need, an appeal for help, a shout of joy, a thanksgiving, an act of faith and worship, a total religious experience felt and expressed by the whole person, hands and feet, head and face, limb, nerve, and sinew, body and soul.”</p>
<p class="subhead"><b>CULT OF THE BLACK NAZARENE</b></p>
<p class="indent">Another example of folk religious devotion is centered in Quiapo Church in Manila, where since the 17th century people pay homage to the image of the Black Nazarene, a larger than life-size image of Christ carrying a heavy cross on bended knee. The image is believed to have been sculpted by a Mexican artist and brought to Manila by Recollect fathers in the late 16th century. On every 9th of January, the feast of the Black Nazarene is celebrated. Devotees carry the huge image on their shoulders and thousands of others follow, jamming their way through the crowded, narrow streets of Quiapo and squeezing their way to touch the image. A similar procession is staged on Mondays of every Holy Week.</p>
<p class="indent">Like the Santo Nino devotees, the Black Nazarene followers believe that their patron saint can effect healing to the sick, bring about success and help in times of need and distress. On any ordinary Friday afternoon, Quiapo Church spills over with worshippers who come to kiss, to touch, to wipe, or to offer a prayer to <i>Nuestro Padre Jesus Nazareno</i>. Most of the devotees are in their late 40s and early 50s, married, and from different economic and social levels. They are motivated by spiritual and material needs. They come to bring petitions on behalf of their families and friends. They look to Christ as Saviour and Redeemer, as Father and Provider, as one who can satisfy their spiritual and material needs. They make a <i>panata</i> (vow) to do something meritorious and sacrificial in return for answered prayers and blessings received. It may be a simple pledge to hear mass on Fridays, or to give money to charity, or to give up vices and live a good Christian life. Whatever it be, the devotees claim that through their <i>panata</i> they have a genuine religious experience; they feel the divine power working in their lives.</p>
<p class="indent">The Filipino concept of Christ was heavily influenced by the traditional Spanish image which places importance on the suffering and death of Christ. The concept grew out of the oppression and suffering which they experienced under the Moors. The Filipinos also knew suffering and oppression from the hands of the Spaniards. It is, therefore, not surprising <a id="page_252"/>that the suffering Christ also has become a predominant figure in their religion and that many Filipinos identify with the Christ of the cross. In a recent article in <i>Image</i> Gabriel Casal remarks that “Perhaps the Filipinos recognized in the tortured <i>Via Dolorosa</i> of the agonizing Christ much of their silent sufferings under the frequently stifling and abusive rule of the Spaniards.”<sup><a href="#fnr6" id="fn6">6</a></sup> In many towns in Central Luzon flagellation is still practiced.</p>
<p class="indent">The cult of the Black Nazarene reinforces this tradition. The novena-prayers used by the devotees hardly mention the resurrection. Consequently an attitude of passive resignation and complacency is fostered among the devotees. They have no vision beyond the satisfaction of their immediate personal needs. Their devotion lacks a social dimension. Jacob complains that it lacks “the hope which longs for true divine life—a longing that ultimately proclaims the victory of the resurrection over death, inhumanity and selfishness.”<sup><a href="#fnr7" id="fn7">7</a></sup></p>
<p class="indent">The same criticism can be said of devotions to other saints, for example, to St. Jude, St. Anthony, the Sacred Heart, the Virgin Mary, and others. In fact, in 1975, the Catholic bishops deplored the lack of social dimension and the tendency of devotion to Mary to become pious individualism. They pointed out that the Magnificat, though it cannot be interpreted in terms of contemporary class struggle, certainly points “to a reversal of the social order in the kingdom of God.” It echoes the prophets’ condemnation of the wealthy for their injustice, greed and deceit. Their letter concludes thus:</p>
<p class="blockquote">Our devotion to Mary should never lose sight of the present plight of the vast majority of our Filipino brethren who live lives unworthy of human beings. These poor and oppressed brethren of ours are devotees of Mary too, and they call out to her, their Mother, to ease their sufferings and free them from their chains. Surely her maternal heart goes to them. Her appeal comes to those of us who can help the helpless. Mary is the model of the perfect disciple of the Lord: the disciple who builds up the earthly and temporal city while being a diligent pilgrim towards the heavenly and eternal city, the disciple who works for that justice which sets free the oppressed and for that charity which assists the needy. Devotion to Mary shows itself in works, and the works which are needed in the Philippines today are the works of justice and freedom from oppression. As the Church points out to us, our mission is to be present in the heart of the world proclaiming the Good News to the poor, freedom to the oppressed, and joy to the afflicted (Bishops Conference, 1975).</p>
<p class="subhead"><b>CHRIST OF THE <i>PASYON</i></b></p>
<p class="indent">As part of the Lenten season celebrations in the Philippines, the life and death of Christ are dramatized and relived through passion plays and readings. The practice is prevalent in the Tagalog region, where the <i>sinakulo</i> <a id="page_253"/>(passion play) and the <i>pabasa</i> (passion reading) have had a long history.</p>
<p class="indent">Apart from a purely religious purpose the <i>sinakulo</i> was used by the friars during the Spanish regime to make the <i>Indios</i>, as the Filipinos were referred to at that time, loyal to the feudalistic church and subservient to the colonial government. A “lowly and meek Christ” was exhibited as a model for everyone to follow. Anyone who refused to obey the church and the colonial government was branded as a “Jew.”<sup><a href="#fnr8" id="fn8">8</a></sup></p>
<p class="indent">However, unintended though it may be, the passion plays and readings became the avenue for the articulation of the values, ideals and even the hopes toward liberation of the lowland Filipinos. In his book <i>Pasyon and the Revolution</i> Reynaldo Ileto claims that the Pasyon became “the social epic of the 19th century Tagalogs and probably other lowland groups as well.”<sup><a href="#fnr9" id="fn9">9</a></sup></p>
<p class="indent">Commenting on the <i>Pasyon Pilapil</i>, the most popular of the church-approved texts, he argues that its narration of the suffering, death and resurrection of Christ and of the Day of Judgement provided powerful images that “nurtured an undercurrent of millennial beliefs which, in times of economic and political crisis, enabled the peasantry to take action under the leadership of individuals or groups promising deliverance from oppression.”<sup><a href="#fnr10" id="fn10">10</a></sup></p>
<p class="indent">The <i>pasyon</i> portrayed Christ as one who was born poor and lowly:<sup><a href="#fnr11" id="fn11">11</a></sup></p>
<p class="poem4">…his father<br/>is just a simple carpenter<br/>devoid of fame and wealth<br/>living in poverty<br/>without property of his own (116:5).</p>
<p class="indent1">In spite of his humble background, however, he dared to go against the conventions and defy the authorities of his day.</p>
<p class="indent">It was unthinkable for a Filipino son to leave his mother. Because of <i>utang na loob</i> (debt of gratitude), he was bound to love, respect and support his parents in their old age. But the example of Jesus to leave his mother,</p>
<p class="poem4">The longed-for hour<br/>when I shall serve mankind<br/>has now arrived.<br/>Mother, from this day on<br/>each other we shall not see (78:7)</p>
<p class="body-text3">opened his mind and challenged him to the possibility of separating from his family to pursue noble aims such as joining a movement to free his country from its oppressors.</p>
<p class="indent">The followers of Christ were “the poor and the ignorant,” the description given by the Spaniards to the Filipino masses:</p>
<a id="page_254"/>
<p class="poem4">poor and lowly people<br/>without worth on earth<br/>ignorant people<br/>without any education.<br/>These were the ones selected<br/>by Jesus the beloved master<br/>to popularize his teachings<br/>to perform astonishing feats<br/>here in the universe (49:7-8).</p>
<p class="body-text3">The <i>pasyon</i> abounded with similar passages, Ileto notes, “suggesting the potential power” of the poor and the ignorant. Furthermore, Christ was depicted as a troublemaker who advocated civil disobedience:</p>
<p class="poem4">Another treacherous act<br/>of this troublemaker<br/>is his plot with the people<br/>not to pay taxes to Caesar,<br/>such great arrogance! (115:14)</p>
<p class="body-text3">He was a subversive who attracted the poor, the common people, drawing them away from their families and their colonial masters and founded a brotherhood to proclaim a new age for mankind.</p>
<p class="indent">Whether the <i>pasyon</i> directly encouraged the peasants to rise against the Spanish government is still an open question. It is difficult not to think, however, that Christ, as they encountered him in the <i>pasyon</i>, became their model and their hope. As a matter of fact, they identified some of the revolutionary leaders with the Christ figure: Apolinario de la Cruz (1814-1841), Felipe Salvador (1899-1906) and Jose Rizal (1861-1896).<sup><a href="#fnr12" id="fn12">12</a></sup> The leaders themselves exploited the people's familiarity with the <i>pasyon</i> to win sympathy and converts to their cause.</p>
<p class="subhead"><b>CHRIST OF THE INDIGENOUS RELIGIOUS MOVEMENTS</b></p>
<p class="indent">There are autochthonous “messianic” religious movements that proliferate in the Philippines. They are usually syncretistic. Their beliefs and practices are a mixture of Catholic, Protestant and animistic traditions. Some are esoteric, and they practice faith-healing and spiritism. Their church organizations are patterned after either the Roman Catholic hierarchy or the Protestant structures or a mixture of both.</p>
<p class="indent">One such movement is known as the <i>Iglesia Watawat ny Lahi</i> (Flag of the Race Church). Founded in 1936, its central tenet is that Jose Rizal, the Philippine national hero, is the saviour of the Filipinos as Jesus was the Saviour of the Jews:</p>
<a id="page_255"/>
<p class="poem4">But by treacherous men you were executed<br/>When we, truly slaves, you redeemed;<br/>Jose Rizal, Saviour of the oppressed,<br/>Christ of the Tagalogs, perfect martyr.<sup><a href="#fnr13" id="fn13">13</a></sup></p>
<p class="indent1">Jose Rizal, latinised as <i>Jove Rex Al</i> (God King of All), they proclaim, is the reincarnation of Christ. They believe in an anthropomorphic trinity consisting of Jehovah (God the Father), Jesus (God the Son) and Jose Rizal (God the Holy Spirit)—three “J's.” They await the second coming of Jose Rizal, who will bring the final deliverance to the Filipinos.</p>
<p class="indent">The Watawat and other similar nativistic movements flourish among the impoverished and exploited rural folks. Their religion is sort of a social protest against agrarian injustice and other socio-economic inequalities. They try to do away with imported values and to revive traditional beliefs and practices. They advocate a non-violent nationalism in their fight against poverty, injustice and human exploitation.</p>
<p class="indent">Another organization that needs to be mentioned is the <i>Iglesia Ni Cristo</i>. It is the largest, the richest, the fastest growing and the most politically influential indigenous church body in the Philippines. It was founded in 1914 by Felix Manalo who claimed to be the “angel from the east” prophesied in Revelation 7:2-3. The doctrine of Christ Manalo taught is similar to Arian Christology: Christ is only a man. Since he pointed to the Father as the true and only God, hence, he himself is not God. Manalo also preached that outside of the Iglesia ni Cristo (Church of Christ) salvation is not possible. Only the members of the Iglesia are saved from God's wrath having been justified by the blood of Christ. Writes one of his ministers:</p>
<p class="blockquote">If this exclusivism is detested by other preachers and professing Christians then they detest our Lord Jesus Christ and God. It is an act of God, His will, that man be gathered together in Christ, and to fulfil this will of God, Christ laid down his law and established his Church, the <i>Iglesia ni Cristo</i> (Church of Christ). Anyone then who wants salvation should enter it.<sup><a href="#fnr14" id="fn14">14</a></sup></p>
<p class="indent">The Iglesia has had its greatest influence among the lower-income and less-educated sector of the society. However, many professionals can now be counted among its ranks. In just a few decades the Iglesia has grown into a national organization noted for its imposing and ornate church buildings and headquarters and its close-knit and well-disciplined members who live simply and honestly and loyal to their church and supreme head, Erano Manalo. Manalo, who took over the leadership of the Iglesia after his father died, exercises absolute spiritual and political authority over its members. The INC claims to have more than three million members world-wide.</p>
<p class="indent">The success of the INC has been attributed to, for one, its strong organization and dynamic and aggressive leadership. Another is its reliance solely <a id="page_256"/>on the Bible and the “teachings of Christ” interpreted by its church hierarchy, which goes very well with the Filipino respect for authority. Another factor in common with other religious movements in the country is its emphasis on nationalism (e.g., only the dialect is used in its liturgy) and social justice, fostering a sense of belonging and community among its members.</p>
<p class="subhead"><b>CONCLUSION</b></p>
<p class="indent">It is apparent from the foregoing survey of popular piety in the Philippines that a great gap exists between what the ordinary church member believes and practices and what the church and its theologians teach. The great majority of the Filipino people have yet to understand what Christianity really is much less live up to its demands. Thus, we have a split-level Christianity. Many of the so-called Christians still live in a world peopled with spirits, whose permission and advice they often seek before embarking on any activity. They venerate saints, ascribing to them divine powers, expecting them to perform miracles and to satisfy their daily need like their <i>anitos</i> of old. For many, the church is a refuge from the harsh realities of life. Small wonder the indigenous messianic movements that promise the advent of a golden age and, more recently, the charismatic movements that proclaim “Christ is the answer,” have such a wide appeal.</p>
<p class="indent">To a nation, 70 percent of whose people live in absolute poverty, constantly menaced by hunger and disease, by ignorance and fear, deprived of education and other basic rights, where the gap between the poor and the rich is ever widening, who do we say Christ is?</p>
<p class="indent">The new breed of Filipino theologians has opted to speak of Christ from the point of view of liberation theology or theology of struggle: Jesus as the Messiah proclaims his solidarity with the poor, the outcasts, the powerless, the dregs of the society. His mission, as he himself understood it, is to liberate the “least of his brethren” from the chains of oppression and suffering. The incarnation is God's initiative to identify himself with the poor and oppressed humanity. The crucifixion is his ultimate act of liberating the oppressed by obediently accepting an ignominous death on the cross. The resurrection is his final victory over evil and death, over the dehumanizing and oppressive forces in the universe. To have faith in the incarnate, crucified and resurrected Christ means to be a part of his revolutionary task to liberate man. As Levi Oracion says: “Christian hope does not engender a passive, non-involved waiting for the breaking in of God's action in history but fosters a willingness to be drawn into the vortex of God's liberating activity which seeks solidarity with the poor, the oppressed, the powerless, and takes up their cause and struggles with them, even unto death.”<sup><a href="#fnr15" id="fn15">15</a></sup></p>
<p class="indent">This kind of faith is now being lived by some Filipino Christians who have come to understand who Christ really is and to discover their true <a id="page_257"/>worth and that of their fellow human beings as they experience “captivity” and engage in the struggle for liberation. Through the basic Christian communities and parallel movements in the Protestant churches, the people are being helped to reflect on their situation in the light of their faith. More are being convinced that liberation theology or the theology of struggle as it emerges from the people's life situation, their struggles to transform those structures and situations which oppress and deprive them, is valid in the present Philippine context.</p>
<p class="indent">But even as theologies have been criticized as irrelevant because they do not originate from actual realities of life, some have expressed concern that the theology of liberation, purportedly evolving from the grassroots, actually arises out of concern for the suffering and oppressed masses but does not really reflect the beliefs and aspirations of the people. As Bishop Julio Labayen cautions: “We must make sure that the theology we are practicing is not just imposed on the base or just manipulating people to realize somebody's ideas without drawing them out from the people.”</p>
<p class="subhead"><b>NOTES</b></p>
<p class="noteitem"><a href="#fn1" id="fnr1">1</a>. Of an estimated population of fifty-three million, 94% are professing Christians. Of these, 84.1% are Roman Catholics, 6.2% belong to indigenous churches (Aglipayans, Iglesia ni Kristo, etc.), and 3.9% are Protestants. 4.3% of the population are Muslims, .7% are animists, and the rest are Buddhists, Bahais, Hindus, and non-religionists.</p>
<p class="noteitem"><a href="#fn2" id="fnr2">2</a>. Jaime Bulatao, <i>Spirit-level Christianity</i> (Quezon City: Ateneo University Press, 1966), p. 2.</p>
<p class="noteitem"><a href="#fn3" id="fnr3">3</a>. Pigafetta cited in Rosa Tenazas, <i>Santo Nino of Cebu</i> (Manila: The Catholic Trade School, 1965), p. 22.</p>
<p class="noteitem"><a href="#fn4" id="fnr4">4</a>. John L. Phelan, <i>The Hispanization of the Philippines</i> (Madison: University of Wisconsin, 1959), p. viii.</p>
<p class="noteitem"><a href="#fn5" id="fnr5">5</a>. <i>Bathala</i> is a development of the word “<i>Bhatara</i>” (Javanese for “god” or “<i>Batara</i>” (Malay term for the Hindu gods, e.g., <i>Betara Berhama, Betara Bisnu</i>, and <i>Betara Indera</i>). Both terms were a development from the Sanskrit word, “<i>bhattara</i>” (“noble Lord, great Lord”).</p>
<p class="noteitem"><a href="#fn6" id="fnr6">6</a>. Gabriel Casal, “Images of Christ in the Philippines,” <i>Image</i> 21 (1984): 6, 7.</p>
<p class="noteitem"><a href="#fn7" id="fnr7">7</a>. See Leonardo N. Mercado, ed., <i>Filipino Religious Psychology</i> (Tacloban City: Divine Word Press, 1972), p. 88.</p>
<p class="noteitem"><a href="#fn8" id="fnr8">8</a>. Niacanor G. Tiongson, <i>Kasaysayan ng Estetika ng Sinakulo at Ibang Dulang Panrelihiyon</i> (Quezon City: Ateneo de Manila University Press, 1975), p. 195.</p>
<p class="noteitem"><a href="#fn9" id="fnr9">9</a>. Reynaldo C. Ileto, <i>Pasyon and Revolution</i> (Quezon City: Ateneo de Manila University Press, 1979), p. 18.</p>
<p class="noteitem1"><a href="#fn10" id="fnr10">10</a>. Ibid., p. 19.</p>
<p class="noteitem1"><a href="#fn11" id="fnr11">11</a>. Verses quoted from Ileto.</p>
<p class="noteitem1"><a href="#fn12" id="fnr12">12</a>. Miguel de Unamuno, the Spanish philosopher, referred to Rizal as “the Tagalog Christ” because of his life-giving sacrifice to purify his people's religion.</p>
<p class="noteitem1"><a href="#fn13" id="fnr13">13</a>. Author's translation from “Jose, Jesus and Jehova,” <i>Tugon</i> 2 (1982): 16.</p>
<p class="noteitem1"><a href="#fn14" id="fnr14">14</a>. Randy L. Wier, “Is the Church of Christ Exclusivist?,” <i>Pasugo</i> 35 (1983): 18.</p>
<p class="noteitem1"><a href="#fn15" id="fnr15">15</a>. Levi Oracion, “Christology: An Urban Rural Mission Perspective,” unpublished paper.</p>
</div>
</body>
</html>