<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>chapter09</title>
<link href="ebook_style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
<meta content="urn:uuid:e628635c-8169-4333-a0b2-b0f205aae46e" name="Adept.expected.resource"/>
</head>
<body>
<div>
<a id="page_149"/>
<h2 class="chapternumber">9</h2>
<h2 class="chaptertitle"><big>T</big>he <big>C</big>rucified <big>C</big>hrist <big>C</big>hallenges <big>H</big>uman <big>P</big>ower</h2>
<p class="chapterauthor1">KOSUKE KOYAMA</p>
<p class="epigraph"><i>Behold, the Lamb of God who takes away the sin of the world!</i></p>
<p class="epigraph-right">(John 1:29)</p>
<p class="indent">With his mutilated hands he builds his world community; he challenges the power of efficiency-mindedness towards neighbors.</p>
<p class="subhead"><b>HE EXPOSES HUMAN DECEPTION</b></p>
<p class="indent">The crucified Christ exposes the deception of those who “have healed the wound of the people lightly, saying ‘Peace, peace’ when there is no peace” (Jer. 6:14). He exposes human deception, not from the luxury of an armchair, but by abandoning himself to human dominance, even to crucifixion. What a painful and inefficient way to expose human deception. This inefficient way is the secret of his power that confronts human power. It is the secret of his love.</p>
<p class="indent">No one now can mutilate him, because he is already mutilated. No one can crucify him. He is already crucified. No one can add or subtract anything from him. Jesus Christ is not “Yes and No” (2 Cor. 1:19). Because he—the crucified Christ—is the ultimate sincerity (<i>emeth</i>, “steadfastness”). In the crucified Christ we are confronted by the ultimate sincerity of God.</p>
<p class="indent">The sincerity of the crucified Christ was expressed in the taunting words of the people who were passing by the cross: “He saved others. He cannot save himself.” Perhaps only taunts can reveal the depth of such sincerity! Normal avenues of theology are closed. All the world <i>becomes</i> silent and all human powers <i>are</i> challenged by the profound sincerity of the crucified Christ.</p>
<a id="page_150"/>
<p class="indent">It is true that he saved others. He commanded the lame to walk. He gave sight to the blind. He cast out demons from the demon-possessed. He was, let me expand the Apostles Creed by four words, “born of the Virgin Mary, <i>cast out the demons</i>, suffered under Pontius Pilate.” The demons were cast out. The reign of God came. “…If it is by the finger of God that I cast out demons then the kingdom of God has come upon you” (Luke 11:20). He shared his life with the poor and the needy, giving them hope. He was an other-oriented person. His sincerity was identical with this orientation. But this amazing power of healing rooted in the other-oriented sincerity he did not apply to himself. He saved others from humiliation. He himself went to the depths of humiliation. He saved others through not saving himself. He affirmed his lordship by giving it up. By healing others and not himself, he established his authority.</p>
<p class="subhead"><b>THE MUTILATED HANDS OF CHRIST AND TECHNOLOGY-BUREAUCRACY</b></p>
<p class="indent">The mutilated hands of Christ represent the sincerity of God towards all humanity. Today hands are a symbol of technology. Are not our hands reaching the moon and beyond by our science and technology? Are not our hands changing our living environment to suit our liking? Do not powerful engines obey the signals we give by our fingers? Are they not capable of sending lethal bombs to destroy our enemies? Our hands are powerful. Ours are not mutilated at all.</p>
<p class="indent">Look at the disfigured and mutilated hands of Christ!</p>
<p class="indent">Technology is an efficient arrangement to “duplicate” things. By the printing press, newspapers can be duplicated by the thousands. By motors, distance can be rapidly duplicated under the rotation of the wheel. The ability to duplicate is today dangerously divorced from the discussion of the meaning of such ability. Efficiency is suffocating meaning. The good is impoverishing the best. The fertility god Baal is becoming stronger than the Covenant God Yahweh. Meaning is subordinated to efficiency. When meaning is subordinated to efficiency the attractive hands appear. The attractive hands often direct our minds to the fascination of idolatry. Who will make an idol out of the mutilated hands?</p>
<p class="indent">We appreciate technology. How could we do so many good things in the sight of the God of the Bible today without the help of technology? Technology may be permitted to duplicate anything, but not human beings. The machine must be switched off when it begins to duplicate the image of God in humans. It must not desacralize the holy in people. The world of efficiency—the world of attractive hands—must be watched by the world of <i>meaning—the world of mutilated hands</i>. What does it mean to duplicate human beings? Today perhaps one could speak of the duplication of the human in the sense of biological science. But I am thinking at this moment of the surrendering of human space and human time to the efficient technological <a id="page_151"/>space and technological time. When the human environment is thus technologized, the uniqueness of the person will eventually suffer, and there may appear a faceless mass of people. The crucified Christ challenges such a technologically efficient way of dealing with people. Technology must serve the maintenance and development of human values, the values of sincerity and reliability in the human community. The lifestyle of the Atlantic world is not the standard for all humanity. It must be judged together with other lifestyles under the light of the crucified Lord.</p>
<p class="indent">Bureaucracy is a world of filing cabinets and endless classification. It can reduce a living person into the set of numbers one sees on his or her passport. Information is stored in the cabinet alphabetically. The infinite amount of information about people can be used for the welfare of the people. Then bureaucracy is practicing the mind of the reign of God. But it can also use the information in order to destroy people. Both the Nazi and the Japanese bureaucracies operated with remarkable efficiency to destroy the lives of the peoples of Asia and Europe. Without bureaucratic systems both militarism and racism cannot work.</p>
<p class="indent">We appreciate bureaucracy. But it must be in the hands of the responsible king (<i>melek</i>) and not in the hands of the irresponsible king (<i>molek</i>) who seeks human sacrifice (Jer. 32:35). Bureaucracy must be judged in the light of the sincerity of the crucified Christ. Both technology and bureaucracy are subject to the danger of efficiency which suffocates meaning. The most extreme example of the triumph of meaning over the idolatry of efficiency is the crucifixion of Christ. There Christ demonstrates the depth of his sincerity in the most painful and “inefficient” way. It takes suffering to expose idolatry. Technology and bureaucracy tell us today “peace, peace.” Is there peace? Have they not become the tools of militarism and racism?</p>
<p class="subhead"><b>WHO SAYS IT TO WHOM?</b></p>
<p class="indent">The sincerity and reliability of the crucified Lord exposes human deception. If someone, quoting from the Bible, says “Blessed are you poor, for yours is the kingdom of God” (Luke 6:20), let us ask, who is this person who is saying this, and to whom? Is a wealthy man saying this to a famished man? The rich to the poor? Literate person to the illiterate? Well-fed to the starved? If someone, quoting from the Bible, says “Man does not live by bread alone, but by everything that proceeds out of the mouth of the Lord,” let us ask again who is saying it and to whom? I am not saying that no rich man can say, “Blessed are you poor, for yours is the kingdom of God.” Indeed, he may say this <i>to himself</i>. Then it will become an extremely embarrassing and painful thought. It will become a call to surrender wealth to God and to work towards a more just society. The passage, “Man does not live by bread alone, but by everything that proceeds out of the mouth of the Lord,” does not idealize poverty. It plainly tells us that humanity needs both bread <i>and</i> the word of God. It does not say that the word of <a id="page_152"/>God is more important than bread, or vice versa. We cannot live by bread alone. We cannot live by the word of God alone. We need both. This must be the charter of the Christian commitment towards a more just society. Often, however, the well-fed tend to preach to the hungry people that all they need is the word of God.</p>
<p class="indent">The hungry do not recognize sincerity in these words of the well-fed people. It is, therefore, difficult for the missionaries sent by the rich and mighty nations to preach the word of God in the poor and starved nations. Not impossible, but difficult. Poverty and hunger are not something the God of the Bible is happy about. They must be eliminated. Poverty-stricken people cannot and do not idealize poverty. The rich can afford to idealize it.</p>
<p class="indent">If a rich man says to the poor, “Blessed are you poor, for yours is the kingdom of God,” he is gossiping. Gossip is irresponsible talk. It does not heal. It causes a dangerous inflation in human spirituality, which makes us believe that this gossip is the word of God. Idealization of poverty by the rich is just such an arrogant bit of gossip, and not theology. Behind such gossip there must be a “duplication” and “filing cabinet” way of looking at people. The poor are quickly classified and labelled. But when living persons are reduced to sets of numbers, someone begins to have demonic power over them. Such a destructive force ignores the living context in which we all find ourselves. “Blessed are you poor, for yours is the kingdom of God”—even this becomes a detached, classified statement which can be applied, and is indeed applied, in order to enhance the prestige of those who are technologically and bureaucratically in power.</p>
<p class="indent">There is a difference between gossip and theology. The presence of the “contrite heart” (Ps. 51:17) makes the distinction between gossip and theology. Contrite heart? Yes. It is the heart shaken by the sincerity and reliability of the crucified Lord. When the one who “saved others but cannot save himself” touches us, the necessity of repentance comes to us. The crucified Christ judges our technological and bureaucratic gossips. With his mutilated hands he disapproves of our gossips. A theology which is not rooted in the contrite heart is gossip. It is irresponsible talk. It may be an impressive theological system with tremendous intellectual cohesion and abundant relevant information. Yet, it may be a gossip and not a theology. Our world conferences of Christian churches are impressive, yet it is possible that what is said there may be a gossip and not a theology.</p>
<p class="indent">One of the prevalent gossips is a talk of ascribing all good things to us Christians and bad things to others. “Behold, I send you out as sheep in the midst of wolves…” (Matt. 10:16). Immediately we think that we are sheep and the other people are wolves. We seldom stop and think that we can be rapacious wolves eating up sheep. Do we know how the Christians destroyed the Jewish people, for instance, through the centuries? Have you thought how the Christians looked down on the people of other great <a id="page_153"/>faiths? When we look down on something, we will soon find ourselves planning to destroy it.</p>
<p class="indent">Will not action save us from gossip? Yes, if it is action which is touched by the crucified Christ. When his mutilated hands hold us, we are delivered from the deception.</p>
<p class="indent">Then we begin to see the difference between “<i>he saved others</i>—he cannot save himself” and “<i>he saves himself</i>—he cannot save others.” Deception takes place when we think we are other-oriented, while in truth we are self-oriented. The mutilated hands of Christ are sincere and reliable. “For the foolishness of God is wiser than men, and the weakness of God is stronger than men” (1 Cor. 1:25).</p>
<p class="indent">Is the church performing the mission and evangelism of God with the mutilated hands? Are the resources of the church managed by attractive hands or by mutilated hands? Are we free from “teachers’ complex?” Do we have a crusading mind or a crucified mind? Are not the mutilated hands themselves the resource that is given to the church by her head, the crucified Lord?</p>
<p class="indent">Beware lest you say in your heart, “My power and the might of my hand have gotten me this wealth, you shall remember the Lord your God for it is he who gives you power to get wealth; that he may confirm his covenant which he swore to your fathers, as at this day” (Deut. 8:17, 18).</p>
<p class="indent">The crucified Christ who is the center is always in motion towards the periphery; he challenges the power of religious and political idolatry.</p>
<p class="subhead"><b>“MY GOD, MY GOD, WHY HAST THOU FORSAKEN ME?”</b></p>
<p class="indent">“Center” is a fascinating subject to think about. Many cities have their centers. The palace sits at the center of Tokyo. I can make the same observation of Bangkok. I have difficulty, however, to find the center in New York. It is in that sense that New York is a psychologically unsettling city in which to live. I lived in a small university city in New Zealand for five years. The city is located near the southern tip of the South Island. In this end-of-the-world city there is a beautiful center area called the Octagon. The Octagon is the center of the whole city and of the countryside beyond. There one finds shopping complexes, post office, court, city hall, church and so on. To make contact with the center is to come into contact with salvation. The center is the point of salvation. It is there that the confusing reality of life finds a point of integration and meaning.</p>
<p class="indent">The church believes that Jesus Christ is the center of all peoples and all things. “He was in the beginning with God; all things were made through him, and without him was not anything made that was made” (John 1:2, 3). But he is the center who is always in motion towards the periphery. In this he reveals the mind of God who is concerned about the people on the periphery.</p>
<p class="indent">“When you make your neighbor a loan of any sort, you shall not go into <a id="page_154"/>his house to fetch his pledge. You shall stand outside, and the man to whom you make the loan shall bring the pledge out to you. And if he is a poor man, you shall not sleep in his pledge; when the sun goes down, you shall restore to him the pledge that he may sleep in his cloak and bless you; and it shall be righteousness to you before the Lord your God” (Deut. 24:10-13).</p>
<p class="indent">Jesus was the center person laid in a manger “because there was no place for them in the inn” (Luke 2:7). He “came not to call the righteous [respectable] but sinners [outcasts]” (Mark 2:17). Jesus Christ is the center becoming periphery. He affirms his centrality by giving it up. That is what this designation “crucified Lord” means. The Lord is supposed to be at the center. But he is now affirming his lordship by being crucified! “Jesus also suffered outside the gate” (Heb. 13:12).</p>
<p class="indent">His life moves towards the periphery. He expresses his centrality in the periphery by reaching the extreme periphery. Finally on the cross, he stops this movement. There he cannot move. He is nailed down. This is the point of ultimate periphery. “My God, my God, why hast thou forsaken me?” (Mark 15:34). He is the crucified Lord. “Though he was in the form of God, he did not count equality with God a thing to be grasped, but emptied himself” (Phil. 2:6-7). From this uttermost point of periphery he establishes his authority. This movement towards the periphery is called the love of God in Christ. In the periphery his authority and love meet. They are one. His authority is substantiated by love. His love is authoritative. In the periphery this has taken place, as in the periphery the sincerity and reliability of Christ were demonstrated.</p>
<p class="indent">In the sixth century B.C. the people of Judah were threatened by the invading army of Babylonia. This pagan army, the people thought, could not touch the holy city of God. In this center city is the temple of God, the sacred center of all the traditions of Israel. Jerusalem is, therefore, safe; it is the divinely protected center; it is the seat of “religion” and the kings. “This is the temple of the Lord, the temple of the Lord, the temple of the Lord.” “Do not trust these deceptive words” says Jeremiah. Jerusalem was destroyed in 587 B.C. The people of Tokyo in the <i>twentieth century</i> recited “This is the palace of the sacred emperor, the palace of the sacred emperor, the palace of the sacred emperor” in the face of the powerful American army. “Do not trust in these deceptive words.” Tokyo was destroyed in 1945.</p>
<p class="indent">The altar and the throne have been related to each other far more intimately than we may admit. Common to both of them is the feature of centrality. In the map of religion an altar stands at the center. In the map of politics the throne occupies the center point of power. From these centers both exercise power and authority. But the mere recitation of the power of the altar and the throne is, according to Jeremiah, a deception. In religion we say that the altar will automatically protect us. In politics we say <a id="page_155"/>that the throne will automatically protect us. They do not! Look at Jerusalem of B.C. 587 and Tokyo of A.D. 1945!</p>
<p class="indent">Until 1945 the imperial throne was called “the throne coeternal with the universe.” In what is termed the “Treaty,” promulgated on August 22, 1910, on Japan's relationship with Korea, Article 1 has this to say: “His Majesty the Emperor of Korea makes the complete and permanent cession to His Majesty the Emperor of Japan of all rights of sovereignty over the whole of Korea.”</p>
<p class="indent">By the time this “complete and permanent cession” came to an end in 1945(!), the fanatic Japanese emperor worship cult had become the center of the Japanese people's life. This cult placed the emperor at the center of the whole universe and asked that all who are on the periphery bow before this central personage of the imperial glory. For the sake of the glory of the center it demanded sacrifice from the periphery. The 35 years of colonial history of Korea under Japan were marked by brutal exploitation and destruction. In this politics of the emperor worship, the periphery was there only to be sacrificed. The center maintained its centrality by affirming centrality and staying at the center. The center engaged in self-idolatry. The Japanese emperor up to 1945 was thought to be the highest person in both religious (he was a god manifest) and political (he had absolute power) worlds. This imperial centrism is in rapid resurgence today!</p>
<p class="indent">Over against such destructive centrism in the world of religion and politics, the crucified Christ affirms his centrality by giving it up for the sake of the periphery. This is his way to <i>shalom</i>. Jesus Christ is not “imperial.” His kingdom does not work in the way that the Japanese empire worked and destroyed itself. “My kingship is not from the world” (John 18:36).</p>
<p class="subhead"><b>THEOLOGICAL EDUCATION</b></p>
<p class="indent">Jesus Christ moves towards the periphery. He thus bestows his authority <i>upon the periphery</i>. With the presence of the center at the periphery the periphery becomes dynamic. Our thoughts on mission, evangelism and theological education must be examined in the light of the periphery-oriented authority of Jesus Christ. Historically the West has been the center of theological education, mission and evangelism. Jesus Christ has been mostly presented to the wider world in the mould of the mind of the West. Languages, such as Spanish, French, English and German, are the center languages in this Christian enterprise. Cultural and religious zones which are outside of these languages have been asked to adjust themselves to the image of Jesus Christ presented in these languages. These “center-theologies” (of the “blond Jesus”) have had more than one hundred years of painful irrelevance to the world outside of the West, and most likely to the West itself. Even today most of the world's Christians, including their theologians, believe that somehow Jesus Christ is more present in America than in Bangladesh, and therefore, America is the center and Bangladesh <a id="page_156"/>is a periphery. By thus thinking, they unwittingly entertain the idea that in all our Christian mission, evangelism and theological education, America is the standard for all. Such center-complex, coupled with teacher-complex, must be judged in the light of the periphery-oriented authority of Jesus Christ. Christians have only one center. He is Jesus Christ, who affirmed his centrality by giving it up! It is he who stands at the center of our obedience and worship. As we worship him, we are taken into his centrality which he gave up.</p>
<p class="indent">There is an important stream of Christian literature coming from the innumerable competent theologians today. But the authors of these important works are doing their best to discourage <i>people</i> from reading them. These books are replete with the most difficult words and concepts. It takes a Ph.D. in theology to digest them. The theme of the periphery is discussed with the full-blown center-language. In general, the sin of theologians is that they write books for fellow theologians and thus they build up a special circle in which they admire each other. So, too, far too many students from the world outside of the West come to the West to receive their theological education. But the majority of theological schools in the West are still dreaming a happy dream of center-complex. Such a dream is not innocent. It is harmful to the living reality of the Church Universal. It is idolatrous because it is elevating the tribal to the universal. The crucified Lord is as much present in Jakarta as in Jerusalem, in Rangoon as in London. The dynamism of the periphery judges our center-complex.</p>
<p class="indent">In the light of the periphery-oriented authority of the crucified Lord, how do we see the people who are living in the prosperous sections of this world today?</p>
<p class="subhead"><b>“PEOPLE ARE WASTED”</b></p>
<p class="indent">Affluence and an inhuman level of poverty are coexisting side by side in this world. One section of humanity is dying from overeating and the other from starvation. This global tragedy is reflected often within the nations. The Philippines have a tiny minority of Filipinos who are enjoying enormous wealth while the absolute majority of the people are struggling in despairing poverty. In Thailand, Thai people exploit most brutally their fellow Thais, exhibiting a kind of internal exploitation which came to be known as “Herodianism,” as some Filipinos have named it. These exploitative systems are all supported by the guns of the military. Even in so-called democratic countries there exists an impoverished class “colonized” by the affluent.</p>
<p class="indent">The Sixth Assembly of the Christian Conference of Asia, in June 1977, describes “The Asian Situation”:</p>
<p class="indent">The dominant reality of Asian suffering is that people are wasted: wasted by hunger, torture, deprivation of rights; wasted by economic exploitation, racial and ethnic discrimination, sexual suppression; wasted by loneliness, nonrelation, noncommunity.</p>
<a id="page_157"/>
<p class="indent">The conference focused its attention on the people. All other kinds of wastes in this world contribute to this chilling result: <i>the people are wasted</i>. That “people are wasted” is, according to this Asian conference, the fundamental pain of Asia. There are multiple reasons for the wasting of people. All these reasons point to the economic exploitation which is going on in our world on both the local and international levels. There is no doubt that those who are starved because of poverty are persons wasted. The conference report continues to say, “In this situation we begin by stating that people are not to be wasted, people are valuable, made in God's image…” If a person is starved, the living image of God is wasted. There is a difference between a hungry dog and a hungry man. The hungry man feels an assault upon his human dignity; the dog does not. For the human person, physical humiliation means spiritual humiliation. The empty stomach means an insult to the image of God.</p>
<p class="indent">After this fundamental observation, we are invited to take a second look at the focus point of the Asian conference: “People are wasted.” There are people who, in their own economic zone, are neither poor nor rich. They have something to eat, somewhere to sleep and something to wear, and they may have more in addition to these. But it is obviously possible that their lives also can be wasted. They are not starved. But they can be wasted. Physical comfort does not necessarily mean spiritual fulfillment. Then there are those who are rich. Ordinarily we think that the lives of rich people are not wasted. But this point cannot be made so easily. Wealth enslaves man and woman. I am not prepared to say that the enslavement by wealth and enslavement by poverty are identical. They are not. We all desire to be enslaved by wealth but we do not want to be enslaved by poverty. The former is a sweet enslavement; the latter is a bitter enslavement. But enslavement is enslavement. The image of God suffers for different reasons. The people who are poor must be emancipated from their grinding poverty. The people who are neither poor nor rich must be emancipated from their “wasting life.” The people who are rich must be emancipated from their enslavement to wealth. Life must not be wasted.</p>
<p class="blockquote">Behold, Lord, the half of my goods I give to the poor; and if I have defrauded anyone of anything, I restore it fourfold. And Jesus said to him, “Today salvation has come to this house” (Luke 19:9).</p>
<p class="indent"><i>People who are wasted are on the periphery</i>. The poor are periphery. Jesus moves towards them. People who are not poor can be at the periphery if their lives are wasted. Jesus moves towards them. But often people who are not poor do not think that they are at the periphery. Then the irony of Mark 2:17 is applied:</p>
<p class="blockquote">Those who are well have no need of a physician, but those who are sick; I came not to call the righteous, but sinners.</p>
<a id="page_158"/>
<p class="subhead"><b>INDISCRIMINATE GOD</b></p>
<p class="indent">Jesus Christ, who has travelled to the extreme periphery, has authority to speak to and heal those who are “wasting their lives” under many types of enslavement. “The Word became flesh and dwelt among us” (John 1:14) to show the supreme importance of people in the mind of God. The name of Jesus Christ represents more than an economic analysis of society by Karl Marx. “The Word became flesh and dwelt among us” does not specify that he dwelt among the poor, or among those who are neither poor nor rich, or among the rich. He dwelt among <i>people</i> to save them from wasting life. When we say that God has opted for the poor—he has taken the side of the poor—in Jesus Christ, we must not mean that all others have become the enemies of God. “The Word dwelt among us” points to the mysterious dimension of the “indiscriminateness” of the mercy of God for all. “For God has consigned all men to disobedience, that he may have mercy upon all” (Rom. 11:32). “All men” (“all humanity” in nonsexist language) here I understand to be indiscriminately the poor, those who are neither poor nor rich, and the rich. Here is the depth of God's mercy. It is so deep. It goes beyond any calculation and prudence. It touches upon a risky quality of indiscriminateness. “He makes his sun rise on the evil and on the good, and sends rain on the just and on the unjust” (Matt. 5:45). He shows his mercy upon all, the rich and the poor. God moves towards the poor; he is concerned about their empty stomach and cold nights. God must tell us who is “in his view” his enemy. There are millions of “pious Christians” throughout the world who benefit from their status quo of the repressive regimes and merciless exploitation. All American educational systems, including theological seminaries, are entrapped in the capitalistic system by receiving capitalist interest for their endowment funds. Shall we just call military juntas, capitalists and exploiters “enemies” of God? How about other millions who accept the fruits of such unjust social systems? What kind of money is it that brought us to Melbourne from the four corners of the world? Pure uncontaminated money? Is there such money in this world today? The overwhelming majority of “good Christians” are busy living a kind of Christian spirituality which does not demand social justice. Isn't it true that Christians are, in fact, supporting the oppressive regimes? “For the time has come for judgment to begin with the household of God” (1 Pet. 4:17).</p>
<p class="indent">Even the most careful theological language about the poor is paternalistic. Paternalism often breeds idolatry. When the poor are elevated to the height of history, when all humanity is centered by the presence of the poor, when the poor are the only mediators through whom we can come to God in Christ, a new idolatry has been created of which the poor themselves are unaware. Then humanity is divided into two faceless sections: the rich and the poor. Faceless divisions are highly dangerous. One side is <a id="page_159"/>“absolutized” against the other. “The Word became flesh and dwelt among us” means that the coming of Jesus Christ eliminates this facelessness. He creates community rather than mass. He is against “wasting life” in <i>all</i> life contexts. In the parable of the Pharisee and the publican in the temple (Luke 18:9-14) it is possible that the religious Pharisee is far poorer than the secular businessman tax-collector who said, “God, be merciful to me, a sinner.”</p>
<p class="indent">Jesus, in this particular parable, does not touch on the economic background of these two spiritually contrasting people. Again, in the parable of the Good Samaritan (Luke 10:25-37) one can imagine—and certainly it is possible—that the Samaritan who was able to pay medical expenses for the man beaten on the highway is perhaps economically a little stronger than the religious persons who passed by. Our world is full of confusing and complex social situations, and it is here “the Word became flesh and dwelt among us.”</p>
<p class="indent">“The Word became flesh and dwelt among us.” He “pitched his tent” among us. He did not live in the “big house” (<i>pharaoh</i> means “the great house”). He lived his life as a “periphery man.” As the periphery man he challenged the idolatry in religion and politics and confirmed the deeper tradition of “God, be merciful to me, a sinner” in the life of the synagogue and the church. When these words are said by someone, whether he or she, rich or poor, they can challenge the existing unjust social order, because such souls are free from idolatry. They do not try to be peaceful when there is no peace. They are “broken souls” (Psalms 51:17). The broken souls can become community-minded souls. They are equipped with keen perception on the whereabouts and works of social injustice. We must not understand these words of humble cry to God only as personalistic, spiritual words which do not have much to do with the world's reality. These words of the tax-collector can challenge human religious and political power. The idolatry-free dynamism of periphery is at work in these words. They point to the authority of Jesus Christ.</p>
<p class="indent">In the crucified Christ the reign of God has come: the <i>scars of Jesus</i> challenge the power of the good that suffocates the best.</p>
<p class="subhead"><b>THE SCARS OF JESUS</b></p>
<p class="indent">The Apostle Paul concludes his Letter to the Galatians with these words: “For neither circumcision counts for anything, nor uncircumcision, but a new creation…Henceforth let no man trouble me; for I bear on my body the marks of Jesus” (Gal. 6:15, 17).</p>
<p class="indent">“The marks” (<i>stigmata</i>) mean brands stamped on slaves. It must mean the scars Paul received from beatings as narrated in 2 Corinthians 11:23-28. “Five times I have received at the hands of the Jews the forty lashes less one. Three times I have been beaten with rods; once I was stoned.” These scars he carried on his body were a symbol of communion between <a id="page_160"/>Paul and the crucified Christ. It was as if they were the scars of “a new creation.” With these scars he was freed from the need for circumcision or uncircumcision. He speaks then unusual words about this most honored institution of all, circumcision. Not scars of circumcision but scars of Jesus are now the central reality for him.</p>
<p class="indent">The Christian church is an institution. Life is never free from institution. Vitality which rejects institutional form is a wild vitality. Where there is life there is institution. Then the question is, what kind of institution is it that expresses the power of life and the imagination of life? Creative institution? Destructive institution? Lively one? Petrified one? In the face of the approaching army of Babylonia, the people of Judah recited the name of the most sacred institution, the temple of the Lord. Jerusalem could not be destroyed by the pagan army, they thought, because it had the most sacred institution in it. But it was destroyed. Jeremiah gave the reason for the destruction of Jerusalem:</p>
<p class="blockquote">If you truly execute justice one with another, if you do not oppress the alien, the fatherless or the widow, or shed innocent blood in this place, and if you do not go after other gods to your own hurt, then I will let you dwell in this place, in the land that I gave of old to your fathers for ever (Jer. 7:6-7).</p>
<p class="indent">Even the most sacred institution cannot protect the nation if the life that began the institution is not faithfully demonstrated. In other words, the temple of the Lord will protect the population if they practice the inner message of the institution: “Execute justice one with another.” Institutional power is rooted in the ethical responsibility of that institution. “Do not oppress the alien, the fatherless or the widow.” Then the institution of the temple of God becomes meaningful to the people of Judah. Jesus stands in this tradition.</p>
<p class="subhead"><b>COME TO THE ALTAR TWICE</b></p>
<p class="blockquote">So if you are offering your gift at the altar, and there remember that your brother has something against you, leave your gift there before the altar and go; first be reconciled to your brother, and then come and offer your gift (Matt. 5:23-24).</p>
<p class="indent">You must come to the altar “twice.” The first time you come, the living spirit for which the altar is an institutional expression will make you aware of what this “coming to the altar” means. There you will remember that “your brother has something against you,” not that you have something against your brother, because the altar stands for the judgment upon egocentric perspective. Then you must take a side trip, as it were. “First be reconciled to your brother.” Then come back and continue your act of <a id="page_161"/>offering your gift at the altar. Practice what the altar stands for. Practice what the temple of the Lord stands for. If the scars of Jesus, and not the circumcision, are the fundamental symbol for the Church, the Church must express the meaning of those scars in the way it exists and acts. The Church must show this original quality through its institutional life. Bad institution is that which muffles the meaning of the temple of the Lord. Good institution is then the opposite of this, namely, that in which the original intention of the temple of the Lord will come out clearly to the hearing and seeing of the people.</p>
<p class="indent">Where there is life there is institution. But the Church is a strange institution created by the crucified Lord. It is this image of the crucified Lord that must come out through the life of the institutional church. It is the life that accepts humiliation in order to save others from humiliation. That life must be seen in the life of the institutional church. The crucified Christ cannot be easily institutionalized. He cannot be tamed so easily. He is always able to crucify the institution built in his name. He visits his Church as the crucified Lord. He asks his Church to have a crucified mind rather than a crusading mind. The crucified mind is not a neurotic mind. It is a mind ready to accept humiliation in order to save others from humiliation. It is a strongly community-directed mind. It is a healthy mind. The Church is inspired to come to the people with the crucified mind, not with the crusading mind. It is asked to follow the crucified Lord instead of running ahead of him.</p>
<p class="indent">But the power of the crucified Christ expresses itself in its own way of “crusading.” It is a “crusade” deeply rooted in the crucified Lord. Such a “crusade” is different from the ordinary crusade. It is a crusade staged by the mind that accepts humiliation in order to save others from humiliation! It does not bulldoze others. It takes the way of suffering. “Your kingdom come!” has a history of suffering.</p>
<p class="indent">In our world today, “good Christian people” are those who distance themselves from the suffering of the world. They talk about the suffering and give some charity to alleviate inhuman conditions of life. They are upright, honest, hard-working and church-going. They are good people. But it is these “good people” who innocently support the oppressive global system of exploitation. They live in “cruel innocence,” as Michael Harrington says. They are concerned about their Christian spirituality. They live a “rich internal life” with Jesus Christ. But their goodness is that of the bystanders. Millions of times the prayer “Your kingdom come!” is said by these good people who live in “cruel innocence.” This is perhaps one of the greatest visible and invisible institutions of Christianity. These good Christians are bulldozing others!</p>
<p class="indent">This prayer, “Your kingdom come!,” does not originate in the Christian Church. The Church inherited it from Israel. The Jews prayed, “Your kingdom come.” They prayed this prayer through the catastrophe of the holocaust in recent history. It was not a cheap prayer. Today when we pray this <a id="page_162"/>prayer we must know that we are saying it after Auschwitz and the Cambodian genocide. The world is replete with hideous lethal weapons. It is in this world that we pray this prayer. We must know the tragic brokenness of the world when we say this prayer. With the scars of Jesus that heal the wounds of the world, we say, “Your kingdom come.”</p>
</div>
</body>
</html>