<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>chapter02</title>
<link href="ebook_style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
<meta content="urn:uuid:e628635c-8169-4333-a0b2-b0f205aae46e" name="Adept.expected.resource"/>
</head>
<body>
<div>
<a id="page_25"/>
<h2 class="chapternumber">2</h2>
<h2 class="chaptertitle"><big>C</big>hrist and <big>B</big>uddha</h2>
<p class="chapterauthor">SEIICHI YAGI</p>
<p class="subhead"><b>SIDDHARTHA GOTAMA AND JESUS OF NAZARETH: WHAT AND HOW THEY TAUGHT</b></p>
<p class="indent">How are Siddhartha Gotama and Jesus of Nazareth, the founders of two great religious traditions, to be compared? This is not solely a problem of the science of religion or of so-called comparative religion. Today this question must be asked in the context of interreligious dialogue with reference to the “absolute uniqueness of Christianity.” In the following I would like to demonstrate the possibility of understanding both Gotama and Jesus as great figures who, in each situation and tradition, found and realized religious truth common to all humanity.</p>
<p class="indent">First, we will examine the problems young Gotama had. Usually a legend is told of the young Gotama who went out of the four gates of his castle and saw, first, an aged man, then a sick man, then a funeral, and finally a monk and a bird picking an insect. Realizing the pains of life, he left his status as the prince to search for freedom from pain.</p>
<p class="indent">Hajime Nakamura and an older tradition have shown us a different picture.<sup><a href="#ch2-nt1" id="ch2-ntr1">1</a></sup> Young Gotama left his family, according to Nakamura, not because he found human life full of sufferings. Rather, he was troubled by an irrational self-assertion. All human beings must age or get sick and die. However, silly men and women disdain the inevitable. They are ashamed of suffering and abhor it. “It is also the case with me,” thought Gotama, and that was the starting point of his reflections.</p>
<p class="indent">If Nakamura's version is correct, then Gotama's problem did not lie in the fact that to live was to suffer. If he had found his problem just in the pain of living, he could have sought a way to ignore or forget his suffering. He could, for instance, practice austerities in order to attain agelessness <a id="page_26"/>and immortality. In reality, he found freedom from the pains of life in <i>nirvana</i>, where pain no longer exists.</p>
<p class="indent">Early Buddhism, Nakamura wrote, saw the cause of the irrational self-assertion as arrogance. Although each human being exists in relation to other beings and is, of necessity, transitory, he or she ignores the fact and is arrogant as if only the ego is changeless. The arrogance arises from the illusion in which the ego separates itself from its relations to other beings and understands itself as a changeless substance. Further, the ego holds itself to be at the center of the world and strives to subordinate other beings to its will. This we call the “absolutization of the estranged ego.” We define “absolutization” as positing something apart from its original bond with other beings and holding it to be the highest, the ultimate, or the most central. Being the betrayal of its own nature, the absolutization of the ego thus implies its estrangement from its ground and degeneration (see Sec. II, below).</p>
<p class="indent">Young Gotama was already aware, in a sense, that the cause of human delusion lay in the absolutization of the estranged ego. Indeed, in <i>Vinaya-pitaka</i> we find Gotama preaching <i>anatman:</i> It is illusory to substantialize the nonsubstantial ego or to become attached to it. To find the problem of human life in the pain itself is one thing; to see it in the silly arrogance that causes the pain is another. In the former case we could seek a solution in politico-economic revolution or in medical innovations. In other words, the absolutization of the estranged ego is not necessarily problematic here, but religion, including both Buddhism and Christianity, I believe, sees the cause of the human predicament in this absolutization.</p>
<p class="indent">This is clear in the Buddhist doctrine of the so-called four noble truths. The first of them is <i>Dukkha-satya</i> (the truth about suffering): To be born, to get ill, to age and to die—that is pain. To meet those whom one hates, to part from those one loves, not to obtain what one wants, that is pain. But, we may say, human life does not consist of incessant pains. To meet those whom one loves and to part from those one hates is pleasure. The lack of burdensome goods is very often bliss. If this is so, pain does not cover the whole of human life.</p>
<p class="indent">With the second truth, <i>Samudya-satya</i> (the truth about the cause of suffering), however, the cause of the pain is seen in ignorance, <i>avidya</i>. The pain of life, therefore, comes from the falsehood of the absolutized ego. The self-attachment of the estranged ego is so unnatural that it necessarily produces perpetual friction with everything it encounters. If we understand the situation of the estranged ego in this way, we can hear even in the pleasures of the happiest human existence the creaking of this friction.</p>
<p class="indent">When we shift our focus to Jesus, we must note that in the Christian tradition we have no reliable information about the youth of Jesus. We know nothing of the problems young Jesus tried to solve. New Testament scholars hold few of the words of Jesus in the Gospels to be historically genuine. Still, it is possible to recognize where the Jesus of history—and I <a id="page_27"/>am here concentrating on the historical Jesus—saw the problematic of human existence: He saw it in the absolutization of the relative.</p>
<p class="indent">First, a very rigid interpretation of the law was absolutized by certain “separatists” of his time. The view of the Jewish law in general corresponded roughly to our notion of law and morality together, though it was by no means restricted to them. The most important characteristic was that God and God's absolute authority were claimed to stand behind this interpretation of the law so that the law in its rigorist interpretation was seen as valid in itself, independent of and prior to the varying circumstances of factual daily life. We can even say that the law thus understood did not take root in daily life; the law was separated from daily life and determined the actions of the people as the supreme standard.</p>
<p class="indent">Under this interpretation of the law individuals were held to be justified if they observed the law without error. They could then enter the Reign of God and inherit eternal life in the age to come while being honored by people in this age. It is no wonder that persons under this notion of the law would be interested in their own fate with infinite passion. The ego as the object of such passionate interest factually becomes central; although the ego still holds God as supreme, God virtually becomes that which decides the fate of the ego in this age and in the age to come, and the law is little more than a means of safety. Real interest in one's neighbor is lost.</p>
<p class="indent">The result of such an understanding of the law was a lack of “immediate” encounter between persons. The relation between persons was mediated by the law. A person did not respond any longer to the voice of the neighbor because the actions of that person were determined by the law. The law was the reality, was the <i>real</i> to the person, for we understand reality as something that, being outside, still relates itself to me and moves me. Consequently, primary reality was not God or the neighbor but the law. The person, as the subject of action, was cut off from the immediate relation to other persons. A person was “posited” by the law and strove, through the observance of the law, to be justified and secured by God and by other people, ignoring his or her own real situation before God. We can say that the absolutized law, cutting the ego off from its real relation to other persons and making the ego the ultimate object of its own interest, absolutized the ego and grounded itself in the arrogance of worldly success. The following story illustrates the point:</p>
<p class="blockquote">He [Jesus] also told this parable to some who trusted in themselves that they were righteous and regarded others with contempt: “Two men went up to the temple to pray, one a Pharisee and the other a tax collector. The Pharisee, standing by himself, was praying thus, ‘God, I thank you that I am not like other people: thieves, rogues, adulterers, or even like this tax collector. I fast twice a week; I give a tenth of all my income.’ But the tax collector, standing far off, would not even look up to heaven, but was beating his breast and saying, <a id="page_28"/>‘God, be merciful to me, a sinner!’ I tell you, this man went down to his home justified rather than the other;…” (Lk. 18:9-14a)</p>
<p class="indent">It is no exaggeration to say that interpretation of the law at that time was like an invisible wall that, separating one person from another, made real encounter impossible. Every moralism today does the same thing. Where the morals or standards of action are absolutized, they become the primary reality to the persons who, on their side, are “posited” by them, not as “substances,” but as the subjects of moral acts, something like nuclei that stand apart from the real relation to other persons. The “nuclear subject” is made stable through the observance of the standards, so that the subject, looking at its own faithful observance, relies upon its successful results and becomes proud of them. This was abhorrent to Jesus, who held “arrogance” to be more sinful than any transgression of the law.<sup><a href="#ch2-nt2" id="ch2-ntr2">2</a></sup></p>
<p class="indent">Both Gotama and Jesus saw the problematic of human ego. The absolutization of the relative produces arrogance. Of course, they differed in their view of the nature of arrogance. For Gotama, the result of arrogance was pain; for Jesus, it was sin. Pain centers in the self; sin is a matter of personal relations. Both saw the authenticity of human existence in overcoming the absolutization of the relative, especially of the ego. Once this overcoming has been achieved, one becomes aware of the deeper ground: <i>dharma</i> (religious truth) in the former; the Reign of God, in the latter. Here, again, we see meaningful agreement.</p>
<p class="indent">However, Jesus and Gotama also disagreed on fundamental issues; this was expressed in the way they taught. According to Nakamura, we cannot know with certainty what Gotama taught directly after his enlightenment, though in early <i>sutras</i> his teachings are summarized as the middle path, the four noble truths, the eightfold noble path, <i>anatman</i>, and impermanence. Although to depict the historical Gotama is just as difficult, if not more so, as to depict the historical Jesus, it is clear that, as differentiated from Jesus, Gotama taught “dharma,” that is, he taught the goal <i>nirvana</i> and the way to it, in rather theoretical fashion, at least to his elite disciples.</p>
<p class="indent">If we look at the religions that surrounded or flowed from these two teachers and compare the preaching methods of Judaism and Christianity with those of Buddhism, we find remarkable differences. Buddhism explicates universal truth rather philosophically, while Judaism and Christianity relate it historically, telling the story of the saving acts of God. Judaism tells how God selected the people of Israel, liberated them from the oppressive bondage of Egypt, established the covenant with Israel that made them God's people, gave them the law, and promised them peace and prosperity on the condition of their observance of the law. Christianity announced that the salvation of humanity was attained by the historical event of the death and resurrection of Jesus Christ. It has not preached, at least in its mainstream, the universal, timeless Logos that anyone in any time can recognize.</p>
<a id="page_29"/>
<p class="indent">However, Jesus behaved differently from both subsequent Judaism and Christianity. Jesus did not enumerate the saving acts of God in the past in order to justify his teaching. Nor did he refer to the covenant of Israel with God as the guarantee of the salvation of the Israelites. Rather, from his manner of addressing and teaching the people, we conclude that Jesus was convinced of the possibility of anyone's understanding his teaching without specific historical presuppositions.</p>
<p class="indent">Jesus taught about ultimate concerns touching every human being in any situation. The sympathy many Buddhists feel for his words confirms this. In this sense the nature of the teaching of Jesus is very different from the message of the primitive Christian church, which did not preach the Reign of God that Jesus taught. It preached Jesus Christ as the object of Christian faith. There are many problems here that must be clarified or solved, but this article is confined to the comparison of Jesus with Gotama.</p>
<p class="indent">To be sure, Jesus did not teach philosophical theories. Rather, he often told stories—stories, however, that disclosed the mystery of God and God's Reign in the events, occurrences, and behavior of men and women. For example, to the lawyer's question of who is the neighbor he should love in obedience to the commandment to love one's neighbor, Jesus’ reply makes clear not how to <i>think</i>, but how to <i>love:</i></p>
<p class="blockquote">“A man was going down from Jerusalem to Jericho, and fell into the hands of robbers, who stripped him, beat him, and went away, leaving him half dead. Now by chance a priest was going down that road; and when he saw him, he passed by on the other side. So likewise a Levite, when he came to the place and saw him, passed by on the other side. But a Samaritan while traveling came near him; and when he saw him, he was moved with pity. He went to him and bandaged his wounds, having poured oil and wine on them. Then he put him on his own animal, brought him to an inn, and took care of him. The next day he took out two denarii, gave them to the innkeeper, and said, ‘Take care of him; and when I come back, I will repay you whatever more you spend.’ Which of these three, do you think, was a neighbor to the man who fell into the hands of the robbers?” He [the lawyer] said, “The one who showed him mercy.” Jesus said to him, “Go and do likewise.” (Lk. 10:30-37)</p>
<p class="indent">In another story, Jesus sees in nature not the universal Logos but the love of God very concretely at work:</p>
<p class="blockquote">“Therefore I tell you, do not worry about your life, what you will eat or what you will drink, or about your body, what you will wear. Is not life more than food, and the body more than clothing? Look at the birds of the air; they neither sow nor reap nor gather into barns, and yet your heavenly Father feeds them. Are you not of more value than <a id="page_30"/>they? And can any of you by worrying add a single hour to your span of life? And why do you worry about clothing? Consider the lilies of the field, how they grow; they neither toil nor spin, yet I tell you, even Solomon in all his glory was not clothed like one of these.” (Mt. 6:25-29)</p>
<p class="indent">In reality, the teaching methods of Gotama and Jesus were more similar than they appear at first glance. Gotama, discussing theoretically, bore living witness to the existence of <i>nirvana</i> and to its meaning to our life. He also showed through his own life the way to attain it. To Gotama, <i>nirvana</i> was something to which his disciples should awaken for themselves, not something he could teach or describe discursively. Hence, we can say further that Gotama “told” <i>nirvana</i> rather than discussed it. Jesus’ stories about the behavior of men and women implies his understanding of the human being before God or under the Reign of God. Of course, differences remain. Buddha spoke more theoretically; Jesus, more concretely, with images taken from daily life. Considering the similarity of the essential message, the question remains: Are these differences significant? One approach to this issue is to ask what differences existed in the audience's experience of the teaching of their masters.</p>
<p class="indent">Gotama taught <i>dharma</i>. Since his audience—many of them belonged to the intelligentsia—did not initially know what <i>nirvana</i> was, they began with belief in his teachings. Once they had attained <i>nirvana</i>, they were able to distinguish <i>dharma</i> itself from the person of Gotama, even though it was embodied in him. Jesus told and announced, trying to call forth something in his hearers. To whom did he speak? It is important to note that Jesus spoke to those who at that time were held to be excluded from the Reign of God. He spoke to the “people of the earth” or “the sinners,” those who could not study and therefore did not know the law and could not meticulously observe it. He spoke as well to those who suffered from certain sicknesses that were widely held to be punishment. They, too, according to a general view at that time, could not enter the Reign of God to inherit eternal life, yet Jesus acted for them. He addressed them with the language used in daily life. He held intercourse with them, regarding them as partners of his existence. He ate and drank with “sinners” (Lk. 15:2; Mt. 9:11). It is important in this context to remember that the disciples whom Jesus “called” to himself also belonged to “the people of the earth.”</p>
<p class="indent">Here, we cannot separate the word from the man or from the behavior of the man who spoke it. Not only is the content of the word essential but also the fact that he spoke to these people directly. The fact that “The man who represents God helped me, acted for me, who was excluded from the Reign of God” testifies to the salvation of the “sinners.” Surely Jesus did that because he held the arrogance of the Pharisees more sinful than the ignorance or the legal transgressions of the “sinners.” This shows the difference between the dimension of Judaism that developed as a law-centered <a id="page_31"/>religion and the aspect of the Christian tradition that attempted to play down the law.</p>
<p class="indent">To the “sinners” at that time, the behavior of Jesus was decisive but not intelligible. They could not see how “sinners” could be justified before God. Possibly some of the “sinners” sought for an explanation that was intelligible to them and found it at last in their own interpretation of the inexplicable death of Jesus as an atonement: He died for sinners so that they could be justified and enter the Reign of God. Not the teaching, but the man, Jesus, was himself decisive to them.</p>
<p class="indent">Herein lies a critical distinction. These Christians believed in the person, Jesus Christ. Buddhists rely upon the <i>dharma</i>, not upon the person, Gotama. Thus, the difference in the teaching methods and the audiences to whom Jesus or Gotama spoke and the difference in the ways some of the hearers experienced the behavior of their masters seem to anticipate the difference between Buddhism and Christianity.</p>
<p class="indent">The matter is complicated. While Jesus was with his disciples, they did not understand their teacher. Still, Jesus spoke with an authority they never heard before. In some interpretations the disciples, consequently, held him as someone divine without understanding his teaching. We find this kind of Jesus-comprehension, the Jesus-picture it produced—numinous understanding—in the Gospel according to Mark. Accordingly, after the death of Jesus, the disciples understood Jesus presumably through their interpretation of his death as atonement. This liberated them from the bond of law-centered religion promoted by some at that time and allowed them to see from whence the word and acts of Jesus had really come. (I have treated this matter elsewhere.<sup><a href="#ch2-nt3" id="ch2-ntr3">3</a></sup>) Thus, there are different levels or strata of Jesus-understanding. We will deal with one such stratum—the Jesus-understanding based on “enlightenment”—in the following section, though this understanding is also inseparably connected with the “numinous” understanding of Jesus.</p>
<p class="indent">The situation of the disciples of Jesus was different from that of Gotama's disciples. Jesus could teach for only a few years. His disciples were not highly educated. There was presumably no one who really understood Jesus sufficiently to succeed his leadership or teaching directly. All of this was different with Gotama, so in comparing Jesus with Gotama we cannot forget these differences.</p>
<p class="subhead"><b>“JESUS IS GOD”—“I AM THE FORMLESS”</b></p>
<p class="indent">In the dialogue between Buddhism and Christianity there is, as is well known, a point of disagreement even among those who are ready to recognize fundamental agreement in both religions: the view of God. Buddhists in general do not admit God as creator. This disagreement is, I think, accentuated in the difference between Christology and Buddhology. The difference, somewhat accentuated, may be formulated as follows: Whereas <a id="page_32"/>traditional Christianity understands Jesus as God (in the sense of the Second Person of the Holy Trinity), Zen Buddhists hold any “objective” understanding of the ultimate to be an illusion.</p>
<p class="indent">In contemporary critical New Testament studies, there is hardly any scholar who describes Jesus as “God walking on the earth.” However, the scholar is rare who in his or her theological treatment holds Jesus to be a mere human being. In light of the lack of agreement on Jesus’ essential nature, we will examine here the thesis, “Jesus is God,” not so much from the point of view of New Testament scholarship but philosophicotheologically.</p>
<p class="indent">Before we enter the discussion, we should recall what Shin-ichi Hisamatsu, the great teacher of Professor Masao Abe, said of the Formless, the true Buddha: In our life we are confronted by an absolute contradiction; we find ourselves in the midst of it, namely, in the manifold contradiction of being to nonbeing, of value to valuelessness, of sense to nonsense. This contradiction is not to be solved. In this situation of absolute despair we must die the great death to be resurrected. “The Formless” awakens to itself as the human “Self,” as “I,” so that “I” can say that “I” am the Formless and the Formless is “I.” In other words, the Buddha as “I” or “I” as Buddha is the true Buddha. We cannot find Buddha outside. Any conception of Buddha as something objective is false or, at best, secondary. Is this thesis reconcilable with the other thesis mentioned above, namely, “Jesus is God”?</p>
<p class="indent">To examine our problem it is helpful to take into consideration the view of Katsumi Takizawa, for he offered a remarkable Christology that, <i>mutatis mutandis</i>, can be the starting point of our examination. In 1964, he wrote <i>Buddhism and Christianity: Critical Comments on Hisamatsu's Atheism</i>. In this book he argued as follows: There are two kinds of contact between God and human beings. The primary contact is the primordial fact of Immanuel: God with us. This fact lies unconditionally at the foundation of each human being's existence, whether or not one is a Christian. However, this contact is not always known to the person in question. In virtue of the primary contact, an awakening can take place in which the person becomes aware of the primary fact. This event Takizawa called the secondary contact between God and the human being. Based on this distinction between the primary and the secondary contact, Takizawa criticized Hisamatsu's view of the true Buddha, saying that Hisamatsu did not clearly distinguish the ultimate Buddha (the primary contact) from the Buddha who “I” am (the secondary contact).</p>
<p class="indent">It is interesting that it was in this context that Takizawa developed his Christology. According to Takizawa, we should apply his distinction to the analysis of the person of Jesus. Jesus, so argued Takizawa, was a human being who qualitatively was no different from each of us. However, he was a man in whom the secondary contact was realized so perfectly that he can be regarded as the perfect expression of God, namely, as the model of the <a id="page_33"/>secondary contact. Nevertheless, Jesus did not bring the primary contact itself into existence. Traditional Christianity in general (including Karl Barth, Takizawa's teacher) made a mistake in this crucial point. In other words, Christianity did not make a clear distinction between the primary and the secondary contact in the person of Jesus. As a result, Christianity was unjustly absolutized. In reality, Gotama Buddha was a man who realized the secondary contact, so that Buddhism as a whole is another form of true religion, parallel to Christianity.</p>
<p class="indent">What is the difference between Jesus and Christ for Takizawa? “Jesus” is the proper name, while “Christ” means “Anointed One,” so that Jesus Christ means in abbreviated form the confession, “Jesus is Christ.” Though in the New Testament “Jesus” and “Christ” are often synonymous, New Testament scholarship has made a distinction between “Jesus” and “Christ.” “Jesus” means the historical Jew who preached the “Reign of God,” while the primitive Christian church understood him as Christ, the divine Anointed One or Savior. The New Testament, as a whole, is the document that proclaimed the faith of the church. Now the distinction made by Takizawa is not the same as that in New Testament studies. He often said that the primordial fact of Immanuel, God with us, meant “Christ,” without, as far as I know, developing this “Christology” in its full scope. To him, Jesus was the man who realized the secondary contact so perfectly. Below, we shall see the relation between the distinction made by Takizawa and that made by modern New Testament scholarship.</p>
<p class="indent">Further, for the following discussion, it is important to note that Takizawa believed that the primordial fact of “God with us” was also the primordial “reality” in my sense; it is working at and in every person, even if he or she is ignorant of the fact. We should also note that Takizawa formulated the relation of the primary contact to the secondary as inseparable, unidentifiable, and irreversible, just as he formulated the relation between God and human beings at the primary contact in the same way: inseparable, unidentifiable, and irreversible.</p>
<p class="indent">In principle, I approve of the distinction Takizawa makes between the primary and the secondary contact of God with human beings. Naturally, there are many problems with his view, such as what “God” or “the contact” means, how his claims are verified, etc. Since we cannot examine these problems in detail here, in the following, I give only my understanding of his doctrine.</p>
<p class="indent">We must first ask whether Takizawa is right when he insists that the primary fact is equally real whether we are aware of it or not. How can we be sure it is real when we are ignorant of it? Apart from the logical question, there is an ontological problem. Natural powers are at work and real whether or not we are aware of them. Apples fell to earth even before Newton found the law of gravity (if the story about how he came to the idea of gravity is true). Gravity did not become real because of its discovery. However, this is not the case in certain ontological areas. For example, the <a id="page_34"/>sense of a text written in a language that no one can read is virtually nonexistent, though we can assume that it is there. The text speaks to no one. A historical event of which I am ignorant is virtually nonexistent to me, for it does not move me. A piece of music that I do not understand at all is to me a mere accumulation of sounds. “Music” is virtually nonexistent to me in this case.</p>
<p class="indent">Generally speaking, cultural products and historical events are virtually nonexistent or unreal when they are not understood, whereas natural powers are real irrespective of my nonawareness of them. The same is true with the human heart. If I do not understand at all any expression of one who loves me, his or her love is virtually nonexistent to me, for it does not move me. Is this not also true of “religious” matters?</p>
<p class="indent">Paul says that he had been in the grace of God even from his mother's womb (cf. Gal. 1:15). However, when he was ignorant of that, he persecuted the early Christian church. Christ had not been real to him until the event of revelation: “God…called me through his grace, [and] was pleased to reveal his Son to me” (Gal. 1:15-16a); God “shone in our hearts to give the light of the knowledge of the glory of God in the face of Jesus Christ” (2 Cor. 4:6). Since this event, Paul could even say: “I have been crucified with Christ; and it is no longer I who live, but it is Christ who lives in me” (Gal. 2:19b-20a). Christ was then <i>the real</i> that bore his whole existence, and Paul was aware of that.</p>
<p class="indent">This shows that “the primary contact” is not real, virtually nonexistent, insofar as one is not aware of it. Even if we had the knowledge of God, the contact is not real. It is potential. Only when “God shines in our heart” does the knowledge of God come into reality. This is the meaning of the words of Paul quoted above. In other words, the secondary contact calls the primary into reality or activates the primary. The matter is somewhat paradoxical. On the one hand, we can and must say that the secondary contact is based on and realized because of the primary contact. On the other hand, the reverse is also true. At the realization of the secondary contact, the primary contact is activated.</p>
<p class="indent">This aspect of affairs is reflected in the following paradoxical sayings: On the one hand, it is said that those who receive Christ become children of God, as if the decision of faith or human subjectivity played a decisive role. On the other hand, it is also said that only those whom God gave to Christ can come to him and believe in him, as if the decision of faith or human subjectivity does not play any role (compare Jn. 1:12 with 6:44, 65, and Lk. 15:4 with 15:17-18). Because of the “predestination” of God, one can come to believe in Christ. However, the decision of faith changes the potential relation of human beings to God, their becoming children of God, bringing this relationship to a new level of reality.</p>
<p class="indent">For our discussion it is important to remember the same aspect in Buddhism. On the one hand, we can say that based on Buddha-nature one can be awakened to it; on the other hand, the Buddha-nature becomes real in <a id="page_35"/>awakening. Dogen (1200-1253, founder of Soto-Zen in Japan) says that Buddha-nature is there, not prior to awakening but after awakening, and that Buddha-nature is simultaneous with it.<sup><a href="#ch2-nt4" id="ch2-ntr4">4</a></sup> Hisamatsu agrees. According to him the Formless becomes real at awakening.</p>
<p class="indent">If this is so, Takizawa's view is open to criticism. Although it is true that the primary contact itself was not brought into existence by Jesus for the first time, it existed only potentially and, therefore, was virtually nonexistent, before the secondary contact was realized in Jesus. In this sense it is still true that “The law indeed was given through Moses; grace and truth came through Jesus Christ” (Jn. 1:17; in John, truth is the revelation or reality of God). “Truth” had been real nowhere in our historical world before and outside Jesus Christ, of course, as far as the Evangelist knew.</p>
<p class="indent">We must modify the view of Takizawa as follows: Jesus was the only human being, at that time and in that place, as far as the writers of the New Testament knew, in whom God was real. In this sense God was real nowhere outside Jesus, or God acted through Jesus and as Jesus. God was real <i>in</i> Jesus, or God acted <i>through</i> Jesus, for God must be distinguished from Jesus. No one in that time and situation could find the reality of God outside Jesus. In this sense Jesus was God, and God was Jesus (see more on this, below).</p>
<p class="indent">We can ask a further question: Who could justifiably make this claim? Not all Jews at his time understood Jesus as the reality of God in the historical world. To some lawyers Jesus was blasphemous (Mk. 2:7). They found even demonic authority in him (Mk. 3:22). There are, as mentioned, various strata of understanding of Jesus. To some, Jesus was something numinous in the sense of Rudolf Otto's <i>Das Heilige</i>. In the Gospel according to Mark, Jesus appears as something indefinable, terrible, and astonishing, as if something mysterious had come into this world from the <i>totaliter aliter</i> world. However, from the synoptic traditions we can say that some who encountered Jesus experienced the reality of God in the encounter with Jesus—whatever “God” may mean here.</p>
<p class="indent">This is also our experience today: Whoever encounters Jesus encounters God. This thesis finds its expression in the Christian doctrine of Jesus: Jesus himself is the Word of God in the primary sense. The Bible that testifies to Jesus is also the word of God in the secondary sense, and the preaching of the Christian church is the word of God in the tertiary sense (Karl Barth). God addresses us through Jesus, through the Bible, and through the preaching of the Christian church (see 2 Cor. 5:20). Thus, to encounter Jesus is to encounter God (see Jn. 14:9). This is the primary meaning of the statement that Jesus is God. We understand Jesus not as “the numinous” but as the realization of “the secondary contact.”</p>
<p class="indent">At the same time, I agree with Takizawa that Jesus is not the exclusive realization of the secondary contact. If we can say that Jesus is God, we can even say that there are “gods,” and this—although somewhat exceptional—is biblical (see Jn. 10:34). Then, for Christians, Jesus is the realization <a id="page_36"/>of the secondary contact <i>par excellence</i>, as Gotama Buddha is for Buddhists. “Jesus is God” is a cognitive confession, not an expression of the mysterious, non-cognitive feeling of the numinous seen in the Gospel according to Mark. The cognitive confession that Jesus is God takes place in the encounter with Jesus. The locus of this cognition is encounter, not primarily an “awakening” to the deeper Self. Still, we can ask how it is possible for us to know, to cognize the reality of God in Jesus in the encounter with Jesus. What is the condition that enables this cognition?</p>
<p class="indent">This cognition is possible when one is aware of the primary contact, namely, when one has realized the secondary contact. Perhaps the cognition is deeper in proportion to the depth of one's cognition. Maybe there are degrees of quality and quantity. Moreover, there is the problem of understanding. We need much training in order to understand historical documents or cultural products in general. However, this is not our question here. In our case, the cognition is essentially a matter of sympathy or consonance, not of objective knowledge or observation. The reality in “me,” of which I am aware, resonates with that in “Jesus.”</p>
<p class="indent">If this is so, the condition in which we, in the encounter with Jesus, can say that Jesus is God is our awareness of the primary contact or, in other words, enlightenment. It is a condition in which one can say, “I am the Formless,” not in an encounter with someone else but in relation to myself. “Jesus is God” and “I am the Formless” condition each other.</p>
<p class="indent">In the Meiji era, there was in Kyoto a famous Zen-master named Gasan. One day he read the Bible. He began with the first page of the Gospel according to Matthew and, having read the Sermon on the Mount (Mt. 5-7), he said, “These are really the words of a great master.” Then he called his disciples and warned them, saying that they should not speak ill of Christianity. The words of Jesus awaken, call forth, and activate in their hearers the reality of the primary contact or, in the case of an awakened master like Gasan, they call forth a consonance so that the hearer can find in the person of Jesus the activated reality of the primary contact. The words coming from reality appeal to the same reality in the hearer or in the reader.</p>
<p class="indent">Peter Berger has assumed that there are two models of religious experience: the confrontation model and the interiority model. In the former, one “encounters” the ultimate, as is the case with the Hebrew prophets. In the latter, one becomes aware of the ultimate in oneself, as is the case with mystics. Berger has tested his hypothesis in group work with the result that in many religious personages—for instance, Paul, Francis of Assisi and Shinran—both models are found. The one does not exclude the other.<sup><a href="#ch2-nt5" id="ch2-ntr5">5</a></sup> We see why. Both types condition or supplement each other because the cognition of the ultimate in the person encountered is mediated by the awareness of the same reality in the person who encounters. Only in Christianity where the feeling of one's sinfulness is strong is the encounter model dominant (Jesus is God, who, as God, spoke to the sinner showing that the <a id="page_37"/>sinner could participate in the truth). In religions in which the awareness of the ultimate reality in the person is more important than the consciousness of one's sinfulness, the model of “interiority” is dominant.</p>
<p class="indent">However, it is a matter of comparison, not of mutual exclusion. In the encounter situation, one does not encounter God directly as such but always through some medium, such as Jesus or the Bible. This is the case even in the interiority model. Here, the person is the medium. One does not find “God” as such in the self. Rather, the person as a whole is the medium of such awareness, as is seen in the expression, “I am filled with the Holy Spirit.” In this sense one can say that in the interiority model one “encounters” the ultimate “in” oneself, while in the encounter model the ultimate “in” the person who encounters resonates with the ultimate “in” the one encountered. The one who encounters becomes aware of the ultimate “in” oneself. The two models are thus polar and supplementary. I do not think that, for example, Professor Abe, who advocates the interiority model, would deny that he “encountered” the Formless as he encountered his great master Hisamatsu.</p>
<p class="indent">In the following section we ask more precisely the meaning of the statements, “Jesus is God” and “To encounter Jesus is to encounter God,” as well as the meaning of “I am the Formless.” Are they not the apotheosis of the human being? Are they not the absolutization of the relative, which was abhorrent to both Jesus and Gotama? What is the meaning of “Jesus” or “I”?</p>
<p class="subhead"><b>CHRIST AND BUDDHA-KAYA</b></p>
<p class="indent">In this section we examine more strictly the meaning of the thesis, “To encounter Jesus is to encounter God.” What do we see in Jesus in the encounter with him that leads to this cognitive confession? What does it mean to see in Jesus something divine? Naturally, our answer is that we see in Jesus the reality of the primary contact. This thesis is explicated in the following, not as the problem of “Christology” in the exclusive sense, but as a matter of the analysis of human existence in general.</p>
<p class="indent">As quoted above, Paul wrote: “I have been crucified with Christ; and it is no longer I who live, but it is Christ who lives in me” (Gal. 2: 19b-20a). Then Paul continued: “And the life I now live in the flesh I live by faith in the Son of God, who loved me and gave himself for me” (Gal. 2:20b). In the former saying Paul and Christ are one, whereas in the latter they are two. We must identify them and distinguish one from the other.</p>
<p class="indent">Christ is “the true Self” of Paul, but the ego of Paul, which died once, “having been crucified with Christ,” does not disappear. Instead, it is created anew: “So if anyone is in Christ, there is a new creation: everything old has passed away; see, everything has become new!” (2 Cor. 5:17; cf. Gal. 6:14-15). The old ego seemed sovereign in Paul when he, a Pharisee, strove for the complete observance of the law, but in reality it was in slavery. <a id="page_38"/>The fate of Paul hung on his obedience to the law. The more he strove for such obedience, the more the letter of the law became his factual “lord.” Paul did not know the reality of God apart from the letter of the law. The real subject of Paul at that time was the mere ego, which did not know the reality of “Christ in me.” So, the ego was separate from divine reality and estranged from real life. “When the commandment came [and “I” began to strive to observe it], sin revived and I died” (Rom. 7:9). The very craving of the ego after eternal life brought Paul into the captivity of sin and death. However, as the Son of God was revealed in him (Gal. 1:16), the change of the subject took place. “Christ” became his real subject; his “ego,” Christ's organ. In reality the ego came to its own nature. It became “free” because it lived from its own ground.</p>
<p class="indent">We make a distinction between the Self and the ego. “Christ in me” is the Self, for it is the true subject of “mine.” “Christ in me” and “I” are in this sense identical. Indeed, Paul could say that his entire mission was the act of Christ through Paul (Rom. 15:18). Nevertheless, the ego of Paul was clearly distinguished from Christ, because Christ was his sovereign and the object of his faith. Now “the Son of God” was revealed “in” Paul so that the Son of God “lived in him.” We should understand this “in” both in the sense of “to” as well as in the sense of “in”: The Son of God was revealed <i>both</i> “in” and “to” Paul—that is to say, in and to his ego, for the ego is precisely that which is conscious or aware of anything.</p>
<p class="indent">On the one hand, we can understand the “revelation” as the widening of the awareness of the ego. We see that, when Paul says that God “shone in our hearts to give the light of the knowledge of the glory of God in the face of Jesus Christ” (2 Cor. 4:6), the ego is then aware of the Self. On the other hand, the Self (Christ in me) is not identical with the ego. Anyway, we can say that the event of enlightenment or the “revelation of the Son of God” is the event in which the Self is revealed in and to the ego, or it is the event in which the ego becomes aware of the Self that was hidden to it. To speak more strictly, in this event the Self (which was formerly hidden and not actual, potential and nonexistent) becomes “real” not only in itself but also in and to the ego.</p>
<p class="indent">This is not merely a matter of cognition. It is a matter of life. The whole person becomes alive. “To me to live is Christ” (Phil. 1:21), said Paul. It is highly interesting that in this statement Christ is neither substance nor person but, so to speak, the Formless. The infinitive of the verb “live” is the subject of this sentence, and “Christ” is the predicate: “that he lives” is “Christ.” The reality of his life is the reality of Christ. Here, we have another expression of the matter Paul formulated in Gal. 2:20. In this sense we can compare this saying of Paul with one by Lin-chi (one of the greatest Chinese Zen-masters of the ninth century): The Formless is at work as seeing in the eyes, as hearing in the ears, as smelling in the nose, as talking in the mouth, etc. Lin-chi was aware that his life-activities were borne by the Formless, so that the Formless saw when Lin-chi saw. Further, he said <a id="page_39"/>that the True Human of no Rank (the Formless Self) is active in the sensations of which we must become aware.</p>
<p class="indent">Christ bears all the life-activities of Paul, and Paul is aware of this fact. In other words, human life comes to its real nature when it is illuminated. This is suggested by the fact that Christ as well as Amida-Buddha<sup><a href="#ch2-nt6" id="ch2-ntr6">6</a></sup> is Life and Light at the same time. Life must be illuminated. It wants to make itself manifest to itself, revealing itself in and to the ego. Otherwise, life remains a dark impulse, a “blind” will, and we remain ignorant of its nature.</p>
<p class="indent">What is the relation of our distinction between the Self and the ego and the distinction made by Takizawa between the primary and the secondary contact? It is easy to see that “the primary contact” of Takizawa, namely, “God with us” or “Christ,” corresponds to “the Self.” “The secondary contact,” that is, the event of our awakening to the primary contact, corresponds then to the manifestation of the Self to the ego. Perhaps we should make a comment here also: The Self is virtually nonexistent before enlightenment, and it becomes real or actual when the ego awakens to it. Hence, in Christianity it is often said that we “receive” the Holy Spirit when we make the decision of faith. Therefore, we have gained something we would not have if we did not have faith in Christ. It is described “mythologically” with the image of something heavenly descending onto us, or, as Søren Kierkegaard said, we receive then the very condition of the cognition of Truth <i>(Philosophical Fragments)</i>. We do not, in “the secondary contact,” find or discover what was there but just hidden; rather, something potential becomes actual. “The Son of God was revealed in (and to) me,” so that something quite new takes place: “It is no longer I who live, but it is Christ who lives in me.”</p>
<p class="indent">What is the relation between the distinction made by Takizawa and that made by modern New Testament scholarship? As noted above, in New Testament studies today the historical Jesus is distinguished from the “Christ” of <i>kerygma</i> preached by the primitive Christian church. This distinction is made in the context of the historical process: Jesus, the preacher of the Reign of God, became the preached, the Christ of faith, in primitive Christianity.</p>
<p class="indent">This distinction is diachronic. In contrast, the distinction made by Takizawa is synchronic, for he sees the reality of the primary contact. “God with us,” or “Christ,” is in the person of Jesus. We can say, interpreting Takizawa, that the primitive Christian church named the primary contact that the disciples of Jesus found in them after the death of Jesus “Christ.” Takizawa has made this claim at least once, and I concurred in my New Testament studies.<sup><a href="#ch2-nt7" id="ch2-ntr7">7</a></sup> After the death of Jesus, his disciples found in themselves the reality of the primary contact, that is, that which had once spoken and lived as “Jesus.” Hence, they held that Jesus had been resurrected and that his power was at work in them. People at the time interpreted such an event in just this way. (See Mk. 6:14-16; many held that John the Baptist, who had been killed, was resurrected and that, therefore, his powers <a id="page_40"/>worked in Jesus.) In reality, the disciples of Jesus awakened to “the primary contact,” which had been real in Jesus as he had been with them. They comprehended the event of Christophany in the same manner as Paul did (see 1 Cor. 15:5-8).</p>
<p class="indent">If we identify the “Christ in me” with “the Self,” then the Self is something divine and human. It is divine because it is the “Son of God,” and it is human because it is “in me,” truly my subject. It is the human Self. “The Self” is therefore divine-human or divine humanness. I interpret the primary contact of Takizawa, “Christ” in his sense, in this way. Then “Jesus Christ” means that the ego of Jesus of Nazareth was at one with the Self (Christ), the Self being manifest to him. We can go a step further and make a distinction between “Logos” and “Christ,” for “Christ” is divine-human, while the eternal “Logos” of Jn. 1:1-3 is divine. It is, to use the language of the ancient church, the Second Person of the “Trinity”—God as the Son. In other words, “Christ” is the Logos incarnate in the awakened, activated Self, as distinguished from the ego. The word “incarnation” is relevant because, as is often said, it denotes the actualization of the potential, not a mere discovery of the existent. Thus, we make a distinction among Logos, Christ, and Jesus. This threefold distinction is necessary in order to compare Christ with Buddha. I am referring here to the trikaya-theory on the side of Buddhism that there are the three following Buddha-bodies: <i>dharma-kaya</i> (the transcendent Buddha-body as the Ultimate), <i>sambhoga-kaya</i> (the manifestation of <i>dharma-kaya</i>, such as Amida-Buddha, to help suffering beings), and <i>nirmana-kaya</i> (the incarnation of Truth, such as Gotama Buddha).</p>
<p class="indent">Before we begin that discussion, we must explore the problem of understanding the words of Jesus as the expression of the Self through the ego, his ego being at one with his Self. We do not need a lengthy explanation of the ego as the locus of ego-centeredness or egoism. We note here only the fact that the ego is self-conscious, that it uses ordinary language, and that it works with ordinary logical thinking, which elsewhere I have called the “differentiating intellect.”<sup><a href="#ch2-nt8" id="ch2-ntr8">8</a></sup></p>
<p class="indent">Jesus asks:</p>
<p class="blockquote">“Which one of you, having a hundred sheep and losing one of them, does not leave the ninety-nine in the wilderness and go after the one that is lost until he finds it? When he has found it, he lays it on his shoulders and rejoices. And when he comes home, he calls together his friends and neighbors, saying to them, ‘Rejoice with me, for I have found my sheep that was lost.’” (Lk. 15:4-16)</p>
<p class="indent">It is characteristic of the word of Jesus that it sounds so natural, though it is absurd to the discriminating intellect. This is the case with the Parable of the Lost Sheep. The reader thinks involuntarily, “Really, who does not do so?” Yet, what shepherd would engage in such folly? Ninety-nine sheep <a id="page_41"/>are, economically, more valuable than one. Who leaves the ninety-nine sheep without a shepherd in the dangerous wilderness where they can be scattered and where there are dangerous animals or thieves? Jesus shows us what love is. Love knows the moment when it concentrates itself on the one, forgetting all others. It is not rational. It does not calculate or weigh. If calculation is a matter of value, love is above the opposition between the valuable and valueless. Love, Jesus taught, is not love “from above to below,” as is often held, for in this parable the point is not that the shepherd searched for the lost one but that he left the ninety-nine in the wilderness. Yet, if we have “natural” sympathy with this story, from whence does it come?</p>
<p class="indent">The same question arises with the Parable of the Good Samaritan (Lk. 10:30-35), quoted above. We discuss it again because it is so important for us. It was a Samaritan who rescued the Judaean who lay half dead, even though the Judaean belonged to those who were quite inimical to the Samaritans. However, the Judean's compatriots, a priest and a Levite, having seen the fallen Judaean, ignored him. (Here we see Jesus’ irony toward the priesthood.) That the Samaritan was moved to pity when he saw the Judaean (v. 33) sounds quite natural, but is it “natural” to love an enemy? Again, it is absurd to our discriminating intellect. It is quite impossible for the ego to love the enemy. How then does the act of the good Samaritan appear to be natural and appeal to our heart? The words of Jesus, coming from the Self, appeal to our Self, while they are absurd to the ego. If we interpret the words of Jesus as the words of the Self, our distinction between the Self and the ego is confirmed.</p>
<p class="indent">We can also compare the Self, “Christ” in our sense, with the activated Buddha-nature, or a <i>Buddha-kaya</i>, that is, <i>upaya-kaya</i>, the manifestation or activity of Buddhist Truth as the “means” of leading sentient beings to the Truth. (We put aside the problem of the relation between Buddha-nature and <i>Buddha-kaya</i>. They are not the same but often seem to be synonymous.) The key to this comparison lies in the relationship of the “Christ in me” with an <i>upaya-kaya</i>, for, as is shown below, the Amida-Buddha, who corresponds to Christ, is <i>upaya-kaya</i>. How far do or do they not coincide? It is impossible to elucidate this problem here; in the following I can only give some suggestions.</p>
<p class="indent">Consider a passage from the writings of a Zen-master, Ryomin Akizuki: “One day Ungan (780?-841), a Chinese Zen-master, made tea. His friend Dogo (769-835) came to him and asked: ‘For whom are you making tea?’ Ungan answered, ‘There is the One who wants tea.’ Dogo asked, ‘Why do you not let him make tea?’ Ungan responded, ‘Fortunately I am here.’”</p>
<p class="indent">Akizuki continued:</p>
<p class="blockquote">There is an antecedent to this dialogue. When Ungan, who gave this splendid answer to Old Dogo's <i>Koan</i> [a “riddle” that novices in Zen monasteries must solve in order to attain enlightenment], was a young <a id="page_42"/>bonze in his study, he visited one of the greatest Zen-masters of that time, Hyakujo (720-814). Now Hyakujo was famous for his saying: “If I do not work a day, I do not eat that day.” Ungan conversed with Hyakujo as follows:<br/>Ungan: For whom are you working every day so hard?<br/>Hyakujo: There is the One who needs that.<br/>Ungan: Why do you not let him work?<br/>Hyakujo: He cannot do daily work for himself.</p>
<p class="indent">This dialogue is helpful in understanding our first <i>Koan</i>. The point lies in the relation between “the One” and “I.” Here is the whole secret of Zen. We can even say that here is the important secret of Buddhist existence as a whole. It is not too much to say that to understand this, this alone, is to understand Zen Buddhism.</p>
<p class="indent">Zen does not posit God or even “Buddha” besides the One. More accurately, Zen speaks of Buddha, for it is Buddhism; however, it does so only to show the relation between “the One” and “I.” Zen also asserts that the things of everyday life, such as making tea, drinking tea, etc., are what truly matter. Now the One cannot make tea. It cannot sweep the garden for Itself. It cannot do anything alone, but “fortunately” “I” am there, and the One works through the “I.” In this way the One makes tea, drinks tea, and sweeps the garden. It does everyday work. Zen Buddhists work quite diligently because they feel and perceive the inner needs of the One, and this One is again no other than Hyakujo, Ungan, the Zen Buddhist himself.</p>
<p class="indent">Lin-chi called this One “the True Human.” He said: “There is the True Human of No Rank in the mass of naked flesh, who goes in and out from your facial gates (i.e., sense organs). Those who have not yet testified (to the fact), look! look!” The One is evidently at work when you see, hear, think, and so on. Those who have not yet been aware of It should see It with their inner eye.</p>
<p class="indent">Hisamatsu, the late Zen-master and famous Zen philosopher, called this “True Human,” “the Formless Self.” Zen Buddhists testify only to this one reality. The Zen slogan shows it: “To testify straightforwardly to the mind of the person, i.e., to become aware of the (Buddha-)nature and to become a buddha, the awakened.”<sup><a href="#ch2-nt9" id="ch2-ntr9">9</a></sup></p>
<p class="indent">Evidently, “the One” corresponds to “the Self” and “I” to “the ego” in our sense. Then enlightenment means that the ego becomes aware of the Self. Here, again, we have a parallel to the “revelation” of the Son of God in and to Paul. Indeed, Paul shows a wonderful parallel to the dialogue above: “For I will not venture to speak of anything except what Christ has accomplished through me [namely, Paul's mission], to win obedience from the Gentiles, by word and deed” (Rom. 15:18). Christ wants to speak his word but cannot do this by himself. “Fortunately,” Paul is there, and Christ does his work through Paul. Now the Self, the True Human of No Rank, and the Formless Self are all synonymous, and they denote the activated <a id="page_43"/>Buddha-nature. To become aware of the Self means to become aware of the Buddha-nature, because to become a buddha means to become aware of the Buddha-nature. However, as shown above, the Self means “Christ in me.” Thus, we can conclude and say that “the Self,” “Christ in me,” and “activated Buddha-nature” are synonymous. Of course, because of the rich connotations of the words we cannot with ease say that they are completely synonymous. We can say that they are the same, at best, at the level of the matter, not at the level of verbal expressions.</p>
<p class="indent">One would ask: Is “the Formless Self” the same as “I,” or is “the True Human of No Rank” then <i>upaya-kaya</i>? Is it not “<i>dharma-kaya</i>”? Is there in Zen really any distinction between “the Formless” and “the Formless Self”? To be frank, I am not sure. Zen Buddhism admits no mythological, objective deity, so the Formless Self alone is real. But, is not “the Formless as I” the manifestation of <i>dharma-kaya?</i> What role does <i>upaya-kaya</i> play in Zen Buddhism? D.T. Suzuki has written:</p>
<p class="blockquote">When the seed of an apple is buried in the soil, the vow of Amida-Buddha which is in the seed begins to work. In the world of dependent origination the vow of Amida-Buddha in the seed operates in its right order, so that the seed sprouts and the leaves, then twigs come out, so that after several years it becomes an apple-tree which blooms and bears apples…. All these take place in “no Mind” [<i>Mushin</i>] and go on just as the vow of Amida-Buddha works.<sup><a href="#ch2-nt10" id="ch2-ntr10">10</a></sup></p>
<p class="indent">It is very interesting to compare the passage above with Jesus’ parable in Mk. 4:26-29: “The kingdom of God is as if someone would scatter seed on the ground, and would sleep and rise night and day, and the seed would sprout and grow, he does not know how. The earth produces of itself, first the stalk, then the head, then the full grain in the head. But when the grain is ripe, at once he goes in with his sickle, because the harvest has come.” The Reign of God is not something merely heavenly. It means that the earth produces a crop of itself. Here we see a New Testament version of “the identity of the absolute contradictory” of Nishida, or “Jinen-Honi” of Shinran: “To become so of itself, for Dharma lets it be so.” We also see here the expression of “<i>Mushin</i>” (no Mind). Taking the matter one more step, “the vow of Amida-Buddha” is, according to Shinran, <i>upaya-kaya</i>, and we can compare “the vow of Amida” in the passage above with “the True Human of No Rank” of Lin-chi or the “Formless Self” in Hisamatsu. Are they not identical?</p>
<p class="indent">Shinran says that there are two kinds of <i>buddha-kaya: dharma-kaya</i> and <i>upaya-kaya. Upaya-kaya</i> comes from <i>dharma-kaya</i> and expresses <i>dharma-kaya (Kyo-gyo-shin-sho, shokan)</i>. Amida-Buddha is <i>upaya-kaya</i>, and it is “the corporealized form of <i>tathata</i> (as-it-is-ness) or <i>dharmata</i> (truth-ness) manifesting itself to help suffering beings” (Japanese-English Buddhist Dictionary). Shinran defines it also as <i>sambhoga-kaya</i> and says further that <a id="page_44"/>Amida-Buddha comes from <i>tathata</i> and manifests himself not only as <i>sambhoga-kaya</i> but also as <i>nirmana-kaya</i> and <i>upaya-kaya. Upaya-kayo</i> or <i>sambhoga-kaya</i> is the manifestation of the formless <i>dharma-kaya</i>, working for the salvation of sentient beings. The salvation is attained, according to Shinran, by transmission <i>(Eko)</i> of the vow of Amida-Buddha. The faith itself is based on it, so the faith is an activity of the vow, that is, Amida-Buddha himself.</p>
<p class="indent">It is no wonder that we often find sayings such as the following in the writings of Jodo-Shin-Buddhists: “To call the name of Amida is to encounter Him, to find myself in the light of Amitabha…. In this moment my former subjectivity falls back and His vow constitutes my subjectivity…. The True Heart of Tathagata [manifestation of as-it-is-ness] becomes I myself.”<sup><a href="#ch2-nt11" id="ch2-ntr11">11</a></sup> However, the sinful care for oneself <i>(bonno)</i> does not disappear, but “when <i>bonno</i> operates as <i>bonno</i>, the vow operates as the vow.”<sup><a href="#ch2-nt12" id="ch2-ntr12">12</a></sup></p>
<p class="indent">From this we see that Jodo-Shin-Buddhism<sup><a href="#ch2-nt13" id="ch2-ntr13">13</a></sup> makes the distinction between <i>dharma-kaya</i> and <i>upaya-kaya. Amida-Buddha</i> is <i>upaya-kaya</i> or <i>sambhoga-kaya</i>, and Amida-Buddha as the Savior stands very close to “Christ” in the New Testament. The story of <i>Dharmakara</i>, a manifestation of <i>dharma-kaya</i> as a man, corresponds structurally to the Christ-hymn (Phil. 2:6-11). Further, Amida-Buddha and Christ are both, as Life and Light, powers working for the salvation of humanity. They are both “in” the believers as their true subject. At the same time, believers find themselves “in” the saving activities of the Savior. So it is evident that “Christ in me,” “the Self” in our sense, corresponds to Amida-Buddha working in the believers as the true subject. Further, when we recall that Amida-Buddha manifests himself as many <i>nirmana-kaya</i>, we get the following correspondence, and this is the conclusion of our study:</p>
<p class="center">Comparative Outline of Relationships</p>
<p class="body-text">In the case of Takizawa:</p>
<p class="body-text">God _________ the primary contact __________ the secondary contact</p>
<p class="body-text">                            (the self)                                (the activated Self—Ego)</p>
<p class="body-text1">Position of this essay:</p>
<p class="body-text">Logos (God as the Son)_____Christ (Logos incarnate)_________Jesus</p>
<p class="right">(Logos incarnate—Ego)                    </p>
<p class="body-text1">In the case of Shinran:</p>
<p class="body-text"><i>Dharma-kaya sambhoga-kāya</i> or <i>upāya-kāya</i>_____<i>nirmana-kaya</i> as Gotama</p>
<p class="body-text">                                                  (Amida-Buddha)</p>
<p class="body-text1">In the case of Jesus:</p>
<p class="body-text">God______The Reign of God__________Jesus as the Son of Man—Ego</p>
<p class="body-text">                     (The Son of Man as its personification)</p>
<a id="page_45"/>
<p class="subhead"><b>NOTES</b></p>
<p class="noteitem"><a href="#ch2-ntr1" id="ch2-nt1">1</a>. Hajime Nakamura, <i>Gotama Buddha</i> (Tokyo: Shunjusha, 1969), pp. 63-71.</p>
<p class="noteitem"><a href="#ch2-ntr2" id="ch2-nt2">2</a>. If so, we have good reason to revise traditional atonement theology, because it presupposes that those who observe the law without error are justified (Rom. 2:13; Gal. 3:12). However, Jesus shows that those who observe the laws as the Pharisee in the parable cannot be justified before God. Romans 7:7-24 implies the same, according to the interpretation of modern New Testament scholarship. Atonement theology then loses its fundamental presupposition.</p>
<p class="noteitem"><a href="#ch2-ntr3" id="ch2-nt3">3</a>. <i>Shinyaku Shisono Seiritzu</i> [<i>The Formation of New Testament Thinking</i>] (Tokyo: Shinkyo Shuppansha, 1963); Kirisototo Iesu [<i>Christ and Jesus</i>] (Tokyo: Kodansha, 1969).</p>
<p class="noteitem"><a href="#ch2-ntr4" id="ch2-nt4">4</a>. “Bussho” [<i>On Buddha-Nature</i>] in Dogen's major work, <i>Shobō-Genzō</i> [<i>The Quintessence of Right Teaching</i>]; text: Nippon Shisotaikei 12 (Tokyo: Iwanami, 1970), p. 53.</p>
<p class="noteitem"><a href="#ch2-ntr5" id="ch2-nt5">5</a>. Peter L. Berger, <i>The Other Side of God</i>: <i>A Polarity in World Religions</i> (New York: Anchor Press, 1981).</p>
<p class="noteitem"><a href="#ch2-ntr6" id="ch2-nt6">6</a>. According to Pure Land Buddhism, Dharmakara fulfilled his vows, established the Pure Land, and became Amida-Buddha, so that anyone who, believing in him, calls his name will be born after his or her death in the Pure Land and will come to Enlightenment.</p>
<p class="noteitem"><a href="#ch2-ntr7" id="ch2-nt7">7</a>. See Seiichi Yagi, “‘I’ in the Words of Jesus,” in John Hick and Paul Knitter, eds., <i>The Myth of Christian Uniqueness</i> (Maryknoll, N.Y.: Orbis Books, 1987; and London: SCM Press, 1988), pp. 117-134.</p>
<p class="noteitem"><a href="#ch2-ntr8" id="ch2-nt8">8</a>. Cf. Seiichi Yagi and Leonard Swidler, <i>A Bridge to Buddhist-Christian Dialogue</i> (New York and Mahwah: Paulist Press, 1990), pp. 107-113.</p>
<p class="noteitem"><a href="#ch2-ntr9" id="ch2-nt9">9</a>. Quoted from Ryomin Akizuki's paper presented at the international conference, “Buddhism and Christianity: Toward the Human Future,” August 12, 1987, Berkeley, California. We find almost the same sentences in Ryomin Akizuki, <i>Zen to Jinsei</i> [<i>Zen and Human Life</i>] (Tokyo: Sekkasha, 1982), pp. 43ff.</p>
<p class="noteitem1"><a href="#ch2-ntr10" id="ch2-nt10">10</a>. D. T. Suzuki, <i>Mushin to yuu koto</i> [<i>That Which Is Called “No-Mind</i>”], Selected Works, vol. 10 (Tokyo: Shunjusha, 1955), pp. 146-147.</p>
<p class="noteitem1"><a href="#ch2-ntr11" id="ch2-nt11">11</a>. Master Chien Matsubara, in Tenko Fujinami, ed., <i>Meishi Sannin Shu</i> (Kyoto: Nagata Bunshodo, 1960), pp. 116-117.</p>
<p class="noteitem1"><a href="#ch2-ntr12" id="ch2-nt12">12</a>. Ibid., p. 119.</p>
<p class="noteitem1"><a href="#ch2-ntr13" id="ch2-nt13">13</a>. Pure Land Buddhism in Japan, founded by Honen (1133-1212), is “Jodo Shu”; that founded by his disciple Shinran (11731262) is called “Jodo-Shin-Shu.”</p>
</div>
</body>
</html>