<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>chapter07</title>
<link href="ebook_style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
<meta content="urn:uuid:e628635c-8169-4333-a0b2-b0f205aae46e" name="Adept.expected.resource"/>
</head>
<body>
<div>
<a id="page_104"/>
<h2 class="chapternumber">7</h2>
<h2 class="chaptertitle"><big>T</big>he <big>C</big>ross and the <big>R</big>ainbow: <big>C</big>hrist in a <big>M</big>ultireligious <big>C</big>ulture</h2>
<p class="chapterauthor">STANLEY J. SAMARTHA</p>
<p class="subhead"><b>I</b></p>
<p class="indent">Although most Christians today are unwilling to take a totally negative attitude toward neighbors of other faiths, there seems to be a good deal of hesitation on the part of many to reexamine the basis of their exclusive claims on behalf of Christ. The place of Christ in a multireligious society becomes, therefore, an important issue in the search for a new theology of religions.</p>
<p class="indent">Theological claims have political consequences. This is particularly true in contemporary India where the exclusive claims made by any one particular community of faith affect its relationships with members of other communities of faith. Such claims make it difficult, if not impossible, for persons belonging to different religious traditions to live together in harmony and to cooperate for common purposes in society. Such claims, open or hidden, also raise basic theological questions concerning God's relationship to the whole of humanity, not just to one stream of it. Thus both historical pressures and theological imperatives demand a reexamination of all exclusivist claims.</p>
<p class="indent">Through the incarnation in Jesus Christ, God has relativized God's self in history. Christian theologians should therefore ask themselves whether they are justified in absolutizing in doctrine him whom God has relativized in history. Today's questions regarding the relationship of Jesus Christ to God are very different from those asked in earlier centuries. In many ways, they are new questions that need new solutions. These new solutions, however, must be theologically credible, spiritually satisfying, and pastorally helpful.</p>
<a id="page_105"/>
<p class="indent">A process of rejecting exclusive claims and seeking new ways of understanding the relationship of Jesus Christ to God and humanity is already underway. From what may be described as “normative exclusivism,” Christians are moving toward a position of “relational distinctiveness” of Christ, <i>relational</i> because Christ does not remain unrelated to neighbors of other faiths, and <i>distinctive</i> because, without recognizing the distinctiveness of the great religious traditions as different responses to the Mystery of God, no mutual enrichment is possible.</p>
<p class="indent">Such efforts toward a new Christian theology are taking place in India. Christian theological reflection in India obviously cannot be carried on in isolation and must take into account what is happening in different parts of the world church, but at the same time Indian theologians cannot go on as if, in the long centuries of religious life in India, there had been no theological reflection whatsoever on issues of interreligious relationships. More precisely, the Hindu response to religious pluralism should become a part of Indian Christian theological reflection. Thus, the interplay of these two factors—the ferment within the world church and the experience of religious life lived pluralistically in India—provides the context for the following reflections.</p>
<p class="subhead"><b>II</b></p>
<p class="indent">During the last two decades significant changes have taken place officially in Christian attitudes toward neighbors of other faiths. The well-known declaration of the Second Vatican Council, <i>Nostra Aetate</i> (1965), is regarded as “the first truly positive statement” of the Catholic Church about other religions.<sup><a href="#fn1" id="fnr1">1</a></sup> Founded in 1948, the World Council of Churches moved rather slowly and somewhat reluctantly on this issue until, in 1971, it accepted an “interim” policy statement on other faiths. After nearly a decade of hard work, often marked by controversy, the WCC accepted in 1979 a theological statement and adopted a set of <i>Guidelines on Dialogue</i>, “welcoming the degree of agreement and mutual understanding represented by it among those who held different theological views.” With regard to neighbors of other faiths, the statement said: “We feel able with integrity to assure our partners in dialogue that we come not as manipulators but as fellow-pilgrims.”<sup><a href="#fn2" id="fnr2">2</a></sup></p>
<p class="indent">These attitudes are indeed strikingly different from those the Christian church persistently held during previous centuries. It is precisely at this point, however, that there now seems to be considerable hesitation as to what steps the church should take next in a continuously pluralistic world. It looks as if, having opened the door slightly, Christians are afraid that the strangers, long kept outside, might indeed turn out to be fellow pilgrims after all. What if the forbidden frontier turns out to be a welcoming threshold?</p>
<p class="indent">Since the mid-1960s there have indeed been many developments both <a id="page_106"/>in the Catholic Church and in the churches affiliated with the World Council of Churches. But many internal tensions have also developed. There are Catholic scholars who feel that the tensions regarding other religions are rooted within the official magisterium:</p>
<p class="blockquote">The failure adequately to explain what Vatican II means, and to square it either with Scripture or with the strong theological tradition that has seen other religions as idolatrous is serious. Unless the magisterium can do so convincingly, it will be under fire.<sup><a href="#fn3" id="fnr3">3</a></sup></p>
<p class="indent">Catholic scholars in India also feel that there is now a stalemate in interreligious dialogue, with participants repeating the same alternatives in various combinations, unwilling to move ahead.<sup><a href="#fn4" id="fnr4">4</a></sup> Pope John Paul II convoked an extraordinary Synod of Bishops “to relive in some way the extraordinary atmosphere of the ecclesial communion during the Council [Vatican II]” and “to foster a further deepening and acceptance of Vatican II in the life of the church, especially in the light of new demands.”<sup><a href="#fn5" id="fnr5">5</a></sup> Inasmuch as some of the new demands are precisely in the area of relationship with neighbors of other faiths, one would hope for a more decisive turn in the attitude of the Catholic Church.</p>
<p class="indent">Within the World Council of Churches, given the variety and complexity of its membership and the very different theological positions represented within its wide spectrum of opinions, the tensions are even stronger, though not always openly articulated. With the many Evangelicals represented within the fellowship of the World Council of Churches, there is an unavoidable tension between mission and dialogue; yet the problem is even more complex than it appears, for there are tensions <i>within</i> the perceptions of mission itself and of dialogue itself. “Though it might <i>seem</i> that the tension between ‘mission’ and ‘dialogue’ has been resolved,” writes Allan R. Brockway, “the real tension remains.”<sup><a href="#fn6" id="fnr6">6</a></sup> The massive studies now underway in ecumenical and evangelical circles on “Gospel and Culture” are important, but they can also become a way of avoiding the challenge and invitation of other religions by diverting resources toward a topic on which a great deal has already been said.<sup><a href="#fn7" id="fnr7">7</a></sup> What is the substance of <i>culture</i>, particularly in Asian societies, without its <i>religious</i> dimensions? An essay on the elephant without reference to its ivory is incomplete, and can even be positively dangerous. Even though the theological issues have already been identified and questions for the study of other faiths formulated, there seems to be great reluctance to move ahead.<sup><a href="#fn8" id="fnr8">8</a></sup></p>
<p class="indent">With regard to conservative Evangelicals, it is difficult to talk about <i>next</i> steps when even the first steps have not been taken. One cannot ask a door to be opened wider when it is already latched from within, and chained. Given the evangelical assumption of the inerrancy of the Bible, it is hardly likely that any positive approach toward neighbors of other faiths will emerge in the coming years. Evangelicals’ recent talk about “dialogue” with <a id="page_107"/>its <i>seeming</i> openness to members of other faiths is misleading. Dialogue is understood by them as a means to communicate the message. “The dialogic method is necessary if those who witness to Christ are to engage the minds of their listeners.”<sup><a href="#fn9" id="fnr9">9</a></sup> In “true” dialogue and encounter, it is claimed, “we seek both to disclose the inadequacies and falsities of non-Christian religions and to demonstrate the adequacy and truth, the absoluteness and finality of the Lord Jesus Christ.”<sup><a href="#fn10" id="fnr10">10</a></sup> It is the <i>instrumental</i> use of dialogue rather than its <i>intrinsic</i> worth as a living way of seeking new relationship in the household of God that is emphasized.</p>
<p class="indent">There are many reasons why, in this matter of interreligious encounter, Christians are unwilling to move beyond the positions they have already taken. Sometimes political and economic factors influence the attitude of one religious community toward others. Quite often, unexamined ideological assumptions prevent Christians from critically examining their traditional positions. But the major reason for the present impasse is the unresolved theological tension within the consciousness of the church about other religions.</p>
<p class="indent">To ask theological questions about this matter is to go to the very roots of our pluralistic existence today. To truly confront these questions, the study of religions has to be shifted from a <i>missiological</i> to a <i>theological</i> framework, particularly in our theological colleges and seminaries. The question is not <i>what</i> to do with so many other religions that claim the loyalty and devotion of millions of followers in the world, but why are they so persistently present providing meaning and direction to the lives of millions of our neighbors. What does this mean theologically—that is, for our understanding of God and God's relationship to the whole created <i>oikoumene</i>, of which Christians are not the only citizens? Can it be that plurality belongs to the very structure of reality? Or can it be that it is the will of God that many religions should continue in the world?</p>
<p class="indent">These are difficult questions indeed, and it may take a long time for the church to arrive at clear and unambiguous answers to them. The Western church took quite some time to come to terms with Copernicus and Darwin, with Freud and Jung, with science and technology, and is still struggling with Marx and Mao. The challenge and invitation of other religions may take even longer to elicit firm and clear answers. But beginnings have to be made lest the church look like a fortress to be defended rather than the household of God where strangers and sojourners can become fellow citizens.</p>
<p class="subhead"><b>III</b></p>
<p class="indent">In contemporary India a radical change in the Christian stance toward neighbors of other faiths is both an existential demand and a theological necessity. It is desperately needed when the unity and integrity of the country are in danger of being torn apart by forces of separation that are often <a id="page_108"/>influenced by the claims and counterclaims of diverse religions. And yet the search for new relationships between different religious communities is not just a matter of political adjustments or a redistribution of economic resources. Deep down, it is a theological question seeking to relate different responses to the Mystery of Truth.</p>
<p class="indent">By blaming the highly visible religious communities for the political and social ills of the country, one avoids a serious discussion about the spiritual and theological resources available within religions for the critical renewal of community life. No one would deny that religions have exploited persons and have contributed to much of the social injustice in India (as well as in other countries). In the struggle for a just society, established religions have often been on the side of the rich and the powerful, not that of the poor and the oppressed. Religions have been unable to tame political passions and, quite often, have added religious fuel to political conflagrations. Yet recent studies on communal clashes between Hindus and Sikhs (after the assassination of Mrs. Indira Gandhi) have brought out the point that religion “is not the <i>causative</i> factor but the <i>instrumental</i> factor in such clashes…it is made to appear as the causative factor.”<sup><a href="#fn11" id="fnr11">11</a></sup></p>
<p class="indent">A secular “emptying” of religions in light of the role of religion in the real or imaginary ills of society would lead to a tremendous loss of creative power. It is very necessary to accept “the normative plurality” of India's life, and to provide space for dialogue between religious, linguistic, and ethnic groups. The contemporary contribution of India as a civilization to the meaning and content of democracy could be in the way India tolerates this initial babel of multicultural encounters that can lead to the creation of new communities, myths, and languages. The acceptance of plurality can well be an answer to fascism.<sup><a href="#fn12" id="fnr12">12</a></sup></p>
<p class="indent">Through long centuries of pluralistic existence India has developed a particular attitude toward religious dissent. A systematic and sympathetic study of this mood of “tolerance” is yet to be made.<sup><a href="#fn13" id="fnr13">13</a></sup> But a few “moments” in India's long history can be profitably noted.</p>
<p class="indent">Already in the Vedic period about 1,500 B.C.E., Brahmanism tried to solve the clash between the One and the many by suggesting that while <i>Sat</i> (Truth, Being) is One, sages call it by different names. It was not by eliminating the gods or by conquering them but by relating them to the One, and therefore to each other, that they were held together in a structure of difference rather than similarity. The One was greater than any of the gods or even the sum total of the gods. And even when the distinctiveness and legitimacy of different gods were recognized within an existential relationship, the ontological substance remained above and beyond the gods. Without recognizing and accepting this Mysterious Center (the <i>Satyasya Satyam</i>—The Truth of the Truth), genuine plurality is impossible.<sup><a href="#fn14" id="fnr14">14</a></sup></p>
<p class="indent">It took many centuries for Brahmanism, and later on for Hinduism, to “overcome” the challenge of the Buddha who rejected the authority of the Vedas, the superiority of the Brahmins, and the necessity of the sacrificial <a id="page_109"/>ritual. Now, however, the Buddha is “co-opted” into the Hindu structure of the <i>avataras</i>.<sup><a href="#fn15" id="fnr15">15</a></sup> Later on, the <i>sampradayas</i> (traditions connected with Vishnu, Siva, and Sakti) within Hinduism were held together in a larger framework, despite the tensions caused by different kings who followed different <i>sampradayas</i>.<sup><a href="#fn16" id="fnr16">16</a></sup></p>
<p class="indent">If one takes a leap across the centuries, one encounters moments when Islam, and later on Christianity, armed with their exclusive claims and allied with military, political, and economic power, rudely intruded into India's delicate balance of relationships. This created deep disturbances within Indian consciousness, the consequences of which are with us even to this day. The Hindu arguments against any claim of “uniqueness,” “finality,” or “once-for-allness” for one particular way are well known. Westerners, together with Indian Christians, are familiar with the English works of Ram Mohan Roy (1772-1833) and S. Radhakrishnan (1888-1975) on this subject.<sup><a href="#fn17" id="fnr17">17</a></sup> The “Neo-Hindu” emphasis on the equality of all religions (<i>sarva dharma samonvaya tattva</i>) was probably more a <i>political affirmation</i> of the relationships between different religious communities at a time when political tensions were developing in the country rather than a <i>theological statement</i> on the relationships between religions. Perhaps, therefore, one should not attach too much theological significance to this emphasis. On the other hand, there is a body of writings in Sanskrit and other Indian languages that reflects more strongly the tolerant mood and feelings of the people in general; these writings remain a closed book to those who restrict themselves to the English language.<sup><a href="#fn18" id="fnr18">18</a></sup></p>
<p class="indent">It is worthwhile to note these orthodox Hindu arguments because they are influential even to this day. Basing themselves on two principles—<i>mataikya</i>, the unity of all religions, and <i>matavirodha</i>, their noncontradictoriness—the pandits advanced three arguments against the claim of Christian superiority. First, the plurality of religions is “intrinsic and purposeful” because of <i>dharma</i>. The basic differences in humankind make it natural and inevitable that there should be plurality, not singularity, in religion. In other words, plurality is rooted in the diversity of human nature itself. Secondly, there is the principle of <i>adhikara</i> which may be translated aptitude, competence, eligibility, which makes plurality necessary. Birth is never accidental. It is the result of <i>karmic</i> repercussions. Therefore one is born in a particular religion because of the <i>sadhana</i> (discipline) possible for that particular person. Thirdly, this <i>adhikarabheda</i> (differences in aptitude or competence) is not a matter of choice but is a “given” element, even the will of God, and it allows persons to choose different <i>margas</i> (paths or ways). God defines one's <i>adhikara</i> by the attraction (<i>ruci</i>) one feels toward a certain <i>marga</i>. Hindus are Hindus rather than Christians because they have aptitude and eligibility only for their <i>dharma</i> and not for Christianity. Therefore the question of superiority or “uniqueness” of any one <i>dharma</i> over others does not arise. Criticism of one religion based on criteria derived from another is unwarranted. Conversions are unnecessary. The <a id="page_110"/>Hindus are not asking Christians to give up <i>their</i> commitment to God in Christ. Rather, they are pleading with Christians not to ask Hindus to give up <i>their</i> commitment. One should note that these arguments, so different from the later “neo-Hindu” affirmation of the equality of all religions, are <i>echoed</i> even to this day and have a <i>pervasive</i> influence on general Hindu consciousness.</p>
<p class="indent">Perhaps it is worthwhile to recall an even more recent moment in the history of India just after the nation's political independence (1947). Despite fresh memories of how their country was divided on religious grounds and torn by massive human sufferings, Hindus as the majority community were generous toward their minority neighbors—Muslims and Christians. In the Constituent Assembly, working on a Constitution for the Republic of India, Loknath Mishra introduced an amendment that would delete the words “to propagate” from the Article on Fundamental Rights: “to profess, practice and propagate” one's religion (Article 25:1). During the debate, such well-known leaders as Pandit Lakshmikant Maitra, T. T. Krishnamachari, K. M. Munshi (vice-chancellor of the Bhavan University), and several others argued for retaining the words “to propagate” as a recognition of a fundamental right of minority communities. Without the support of Hindu leaders, the clause would have never passed. Soli Sorabji, a distinguished jurist, remarks, “One cannot but be struck by the broadmindedness and the spirit of tolerance and accommodation displayed by the founding fathers of the majority community towards their Christian brethren.”<sup><a href="#fn19" id="fnr19">19</a></sup> In no other country, therefore, does the claim for the “uniqueness” of one particular religious tradition or the assertion of the “normativeness” of one particular faith over others sound so rude, out of place, and theologically arrogant as in India. Such assertions contradict India's whole ethos and tear at the fabric of interreligious relationships so carefully woven during centuries of conflict, tension, and massive sufferings by the people.<sup><a href="#fn20" id="fnr20">20</a></sup></p>
<p class="subhead"><b>IV</b></p>
<p class="indent">In this context of ongoing life in India where Christians live and work together with neighbors of other faiths, where a deep-seated <i>theological</i> tolerance coexists with <i>social</i> intolerance and is sometimes mixed with outbursts of <i>political</i> intolerance, can a christology be developed that is free from the burdens of the past but is unmistakably Christian and recognizably Indian?</p>
<p class="indent">Any attempt to formulate such a christology should take into account at least two factors that have emerged out of India's long history of multireligious life. One is the acceptance of a sense of Mystery and the other the rejection of an exclusive attitude where ultimate matters are concerned. Mystery is not something to be used to fill the gaps in rational knowledge. Mystery provides the ontological basis for tolerance, which would otherwise <a id="page_111"/>run the risk of becoming uncritical friendliness. This Mystery, the Truth of the Truth <i>(Satyasya Satyam), is</i> the transcendent Center that remains always beyond and greater than apprehensions of it or even the sum total of those apprehensions. It is beyond cognitive knowledge <i>(tarka)</i> but it is open to vision <i>(dristi)</i> and intuition <i>(anubhava)</i>. It is near yet far, knowable yet unknowable, intimate yet ultimate and, according to one particular Hindu view, cannot even be described as “one.” It is “not-two” <i>(advaita)</i>, indicating thereby that diversity is within the heart of Being itself and therefore may be intrinsic to human nature as well.</p>
<p class="indent">This emphasis on Mystery is not meant as an escape from the need for rational inquiry, but it does insist that the rational is not the only way to do theology; the mystical and the esthetic also have their necessary contributions to theology. Mystery lies beyond the theistic/nontheistic debate. Mystery is an ontological status to be accepted, not an epistemological problem to be solved. Without a sense of Mystery, <i>Theos</i> cannot remain <i>Theos</i>, nor <i>Sat</i> remain <i>Sat</i>, nor can Ultimate Reality remain ultimate.</p>
<p class="indent">In religious life, Mystery and meaning are related. Without a disclosure of meaning at particular points in history or in human consciousness, there can be no human response to Mystery. The history of religions shows that these responses are many and are different, sometimes even within a particular religious tradition. Quite often these differences are due to cultural and historical factors. Although each response to Mystery has a normative claim on the followers of that particular tradition, the criteria derived from one response cannot be made the norm to judge the responses of other traditions.</p>
<p class="indent">One strand of Hinduism, for example, has described this Mystery as <i>sat-cit-ananda</i> (truth-consciousness-bliss). This is one way of responding to Mystery in a particular cultural setting that is very different from that of the early Christian centuries. Christians believe that in Jesus Christ the meaning of this Mystery is revealed in such a way as to constitute a revelation of God and to provide a way of salvation for all human beings. The doctrine of the Trinity, which describes God as Father, Son, and Holy Spirit, is an attempt to make sense of this Mystery through the meaning disclosed in Jesus of Nazareth, identified with Christ, and using categories from Greek thought alien to the Indian context.</p>
<p class="indent">Both the terms “Brahman” and “God” are culture-conditioned. One could as well use the term Mystery, which may be more acceptable. In this case the two statements—namely, that “Brahman is <i>sat-cit-ananda</i>” and “God is triune, Father, Son, and Holy Spirit”—could be regarded as two responses to the same Mystery in two cultural settings. One cannot be used as a norm to judge the other. The limitations of language are obvious here. Feminist theologians have already objected to the “maleness” of the trinitarian formula; if cultural obstacles could be overcome, they might be persuaded to accept the Hindu notion, which avoids this problem. In any case, neither <i>sat-cit-ananda</i> nor Trinity could, in linguistic terms, adequately <a id="page_112"/>describe the inner ontological working of Mystery. One could ask, therefore, on what grounds can it be claimed that the trinitarian formula offers a “truer” insight into the nature of Mystery than does <i>sat-cit-ananda?</i> At best, the two formulations can only be symbolic, pointing to the Mystery, affirming the meaning disclosed, but retaining the residual depth.</p>
<p class="indent">No one could have anticipated in advance the presence of God in the life and death of Jesus of Nazareth. There is an incomprehensible dimension to it. That Jesus is the Christ of God is a confession of faith by the Christian community. It does indeed remain normative to Christians everywhere, but to make it “absolutely singular” and to maintain that the meaning of the Mystery is disclosed <i>only</i> in one particular person at one particular point, and nowhere else, is to ignore one's neighbors of other faiths who have other points of reference. To make exclusive claims for our particular tradition is not the best way to love our neighbors as ourselves.</p>
<p class="indent">If, then, human responses to the <i>revolution</i> of Mystery are plural and are articulated in different ways, the same observation applies to the experience of <i>salvation</i> as well, and to the manner in which it is articulated by followers of different religious traditions.</p>
<p class="indent">In multi-religious situations such as in India, the notions of “salvation” and of what we are saved from are understood differently. This is to be expected. The question here is not whether there <i>may be</i> plural ways of salvation. In multireligious situations the fact is that there <i>are</i> plural ways of salvation, experienced and articulated in different ways. Both the context and expression of salvation are different. When the questions asked about the human predicament are different, the answers are bound to be different. How can it be otherwise? Already in the New Testament salvation through Jesus Christ was experienced and interpreted differently by the Aramaic-speaking Jewish Christians, the Hellenic Jews of the diaspora who were much more open to other peoples among whom they lived, and the non-Jewish Christians such as the Greeks, Syrians, and Romans who had no part in the Jewish “history of salvation.” And yet, there was no doubt about the root of this experience of salvation in Jesus Christ.</p>
<p class="indent">Whereas Christians use the term “sin” to describe the human predicament, Hindus might use <i>avidya</i> (ignorance) and Buddhists <i>dukkha</i> (sorrow) as the condition from which deliverance is sought. The notions of <i>moksha</i> and <i>nirvana</i> as the ultimate goals of deliverance are conceived differently, as also the <i>sadhanas</i>, the ways of discipline, advocated as necessary to attain these goals. In addition, today one must also take into account the desperate desire of millions of human beings for salvation of a different kind—namely, liberation from oppression, exploitation, and injustice. In this context, many feminist Christian theologians decline to accept as normative the notion of a revelation and salvation through a male person that excludes more than half of humanity.</p>
<p class="indent">Where alternative ways of salvation have provided meaning and purpose for millions of persons in other cultures for more than two or three thousand <a id="page_113"/>years, to claim that the Judeo-Christian-Western tradition has the <i>only</i> answer to all problems in all places and for all persons in the world is presumptuous, if not incredible. This is not to deny the <i>validity</i> of the Christian experience of salvation in Jesus Christ, but it is to question the <i>exclusive</i> claims made for it by Christians, claims that are unsupported by any evidence in history, or in the institutional life of the church, or in the lives of many Christians who make such claims. If salvation comes <i>from God</i>—and for Christians it cannot be otherwise—then possibilities should be left open to recognize the validity of other experiences of salvation.</p>
<p class="indent">The nature of Mystery is such that any claim on the part of one religious community to have exclusive or unique or final knowledge becomes inadmissible. Exclusiveness puts fences around the Mystery. It creates dichotomies between the divine and the human, between humanity and nature, and between different religious communities. It leaves little room for the nonrational elements in religious life—the mystical and the esthetic, rituals and symbols, prayer, worship, and meditation. It is not surprising that very often Christian theologians ready to discuss religious “ideas” with others feel extremely uneasy when it comes to matters of “worship” or art in interreligious meetings <i>(satsang</i>—fellowship of truth). Further, those who make open or hidden claims of exclusiveness find it impossible to live together with neighbors of other faiths except on very superficial social levels. A one-way, exclusivistic “proclamation” is like a stone hurled into a flowing stream. It makes a little splash, and then remains submerged, and makes no difference whatsoever to the waters flowing past it. Someone might even pick it up and hurl it back to where it came from.</p>
<p class="indent">Very often, claims for the normativeness of Christ are based on the authority of the Bible. Exclusive texts are hurled back and forth as if just by uttering texts from scriptures the problem is settled. The authority of the Bible is indeed important for Christians. In the multireligious situations, where there are other scriptures whose authority is accepted by neighbors of other religious traditions, how can the claims based on one particular scripture become the norm, or authority for all? Here, too, the plurality of scriptures is a fact to be accepted, not a notion to be discussed.</p>
<p class="indent">But there are even more important factors to be recognized. For example, what does one make of the fact, hardly recognized by Christian theologians, that none of the revelations on which Christians theologize today took place in a West European context or were written down in a West European language? Recent studies in the ontology of language point out how precarious it is to depend on texts and translations when it comes to the question of authority in matters of faith.<sup><a href="#fn21" id="fnr21">21</a></sup></p>
<p class="indent">Even notions of “authority” are different when it comes to interpreting holy scriptures. To the Hindu and the Buddhist, the authority of the scriptures does not depend on the <i>writtenness</i> of the text, but on <i>hearing</i> and <i>seeing</i> the word <i>(Sabda)</i>. Texts are indeed important. But a Hindu or Buddhist would reject the notion that through the study of texts one can <a id="page_114"/>encounter the truth behind them, or that merely by quoting texts one can encounter the truth within them, or that merely by quoting texts truth is communicated to hearers. Knowledge of God is not something to be <i>discovered</i> through the study of written texts. It is to be <i>recovered</i> through <i>hearing</i>. The holiness of words is intrinsic. One participates in it not through understanding but through reciting and hearing it.</p>
<p class="indent">The Western notion of editing an <i>original</i> text is an intrusion into Eastern situations. One has to go behind the written texts to the <i>sound</i> of the Word, recited and heard over long periods of time by the community, in order to see how words have functioned religiously in matters of faith. This question of hermeneutics in multireligious situations needs careful study. In India, around 35-32 B.C.E., Buddhists were the first to commit their sacred oral texts to writing. Attempts are now being made by Indian Christian biblical scholars to study Hindu and Buddhist hermeneutical theory as it has developed over the centuries, and to work out the implications of Eastern hermeneutics for the Indian Christian theological enterprise.<sup><a href="#fn22" id="fnr22">22</a></sup></p>
<p class="indent">If the great religious traditions of humanity are indeed different responses to the Mystery of God or <i>Sat</i> or the Transcendent or Ultimate Reality, then the <i>distinctiveness</i> of each response, in this instance the Christian, should be stated in such a way that a mutually critical and enriching <i>relationship</i> between different responses becomes naturally possible. Exclusiveness regards universality as the extension of its own particularity and seeks to conquer other faiths. Inclusiveness, though seeming generous, actually co-opts other faiths without their leave. Both exclusiveness and its patronizing cousin inclusiveness may even be forms of theological violence against neighbors of other faiths and, when combined with economic, political, and military power, as has often happened in history, become dangerous to communal harmony and world peace. It is not without significance that only after the second world war (1945), when, with the dismantling of colonialism, new nations emerged on the stage of history and asserted their identity through their own religions and cultures, that both the Vatican and the World Council of Churches began to articulate a more positive attitude toward peoples of other religious traditions, although both church bodies remained reluctant to recognize the <i>theological</i> significance of these other faiths.</p>
<p class="indent">In moving beyond exclusiveness and inclusiveness, Christians must come to a clearer grasp of the uniqueness of Jesus. The distinctiveness of Jesus Christ does not lie in claiming that “Jesus Christ is God.” This amounts to saying that Jesus Christ is the tribal god of Christians over against the gods of other peoples. Elevating Jesus to the status of God or limiting Christ to Jesus of Nazareth are both temptations to be avoided. The former runs the risk of an impoverished “Jesusology” and the latter of becoming a narrow “Christomonism.” A theocentric christology avoids these dangers and becomes more helpful in establishing new relationships with neighbors of other faiths.</p>
<a id="page_115"/>
<p class="indent">A theocentric (or Mystery-centered) christology is not a new fashion. The Bible continually emphasizes the priority of God, and Jesus himself was theocentric. In recent years, within the Indian and the broader world church, discussion of this question has begun. The issues were earlier hinted at or articulated by certain Christian theologians in different parts of the world. Both in the Catholic Church and in the churches affiliated with the World Council of Churches, new dimensions of this christologico-ecumenical issue are taking shape. On one level, the discussions seem to be within a parochial Christian ecumenical framework, seeking to accommodate different Christian viewpoints. On another level, however, the implications of these new christological insights go far beyond the narrow confines of Christians to the deeper and larger ecumenism that embraces the whole of humanity. In discussions in different parts of the world, a new hermeneutics is developing, a hermeneutics willing to read and hear biblical texts about Jesus in ways quite different from those of the West.</p>
<p class="indent">In the West, the International Theological Commission appointed by the pope admits no distinction between christology and theology. And yet it states that “confusion between christology and theology results if one supposes that the name of God is totally unknown outside of Jesus Christ and that there exists no other theology than that which arises from the Christian revelation.” The commission thus opens the possibility of recognizing theologies other than Christian. The statement goes on to call the church to cooperate with others in order “to participate in building a civilization of love.”<sup><a href="#fn23" id="fnr23">23</a></sup></p>
<p class="indent">Also in the World Council of Churches, fresh discussions have started on “the inner core” of its basic credal affirmation that “the Lord Jesus Christ is God and Savior.” Throughout the council's history, questions have been raised about the adequacy of this formulation. On the one hand, New Testament scholars have pointed out that the statement identifying Jesus Christ with God goes beyond the witness of the New Testament. On the other, Catholic and Orthodox theologians have felt that the statement is narrowly “christomonistic” and needs a full-fledged trinitarian emphasis. More recently, additions have been made to the original phrasing.<sup><a href="#fn24" id="fnr24">24</a></sup> In the present discussion, two factors have become important: the christological question is being raised against the background of renewed dialogue with adherents of other faiths and of cooperation with persons of secular convictions who are struggling against the forces of death and destruction. The ontological equation of Jesus Christ with God would scarcely allow any serious discussion with neighbors of other faiths or with secular humanists.<sup><a href="#fn25" id="fnr25">25</a></sup></p>
<p class="indent">Throughout the Bible the priority of God is taken for granted. The affirmation that God is the creator of all life and of all humanity puts Christians and their neighbors of other faiths together at the very source of life. God breathes life into humanity (Gen. 2:7) and in doing so entrusts to it responsibility for all created life (Gen. 2:15). God lets men and women share in the divine power to create life (Gen. 4:1). Life is God's gift, and <a id="page_116"/>human beings have the duty and responsibility to cherish and guard it.</p>
<p class="indent">This belief in the ontological priority of God is also taken for granted by Jesus Christ and his hearers in the New Testament. He started his ministry by declaring that “the time is fulfilled, and the kingdom of God is at hand” (Mark 1:14). New Testament writers emphasize God's initiative over and over again. “God so loved the world that he gave his only begotten son” (John 3:16). “God was in Christ reconciling the world to himself” (2 Cor. 5:19). God set forth in Christ “a plan for the fullness of time, to unite all things in him” (Eph. 1:10). “And when all things are subjected to him, then the son also will be subjected to him who put all things under him that God may be all in all” (1 Cor. 15:28). This acknowledgment that God is the Creator and Redeemer of all life enables the entire world, the whole of humanity, to be included in the struggle for life and to feel responsible for its preservation and its continuation. God, in the sense of <i>Sat</i> or Mystery or the Transcendent or Ultimate Reality, is the ultimate horizon over the ocean of life. God's covenant with all humanity, of which the rainbow is a timeless symbol, has never been abrogated.<sup><a href="#fn26" id="fnr26">26</a></sup></p>
<p class="indent">A theocentric christology provides more theological space for Christians to live together with neighbors of other faiths. “Christomonism” does not do full justice to the total evidence of the New Testament, nor does it give sufficient emphasis to the trinitarian dimension of the Christian faith. It tends to minimize the work of the Holy Spirit in the lives of others. The Orthodox rejection of the <i>filioque</i> clause in the description of the procession of the Holy Spirit in the Nicene Creed—that is, its insistence that the Spirit proceeds from the Father and <i>not</i> from the Son—has far-reaching ecumenical significance. To draw attention to these points is not to minimize the centrality of Jesus Christ in Christian faith, but to put him more clearly into the structure of trinitarian faith. New insights contributed by biblical studies and research on the great christological councils of the church (Nicea 325 C.E. and Chalcedon 451 C.E.) help us better understand how God is in Jesus Christ and how Jesus Christ is related to God. Christocentrism without theocentrism leads to idolatry.</p>
<p class="indent">A theocentric christology provides a basis for retaining the Mystery of God while acknowledging the <i>distinctiveness</i> of Jesus Christ. It makes commitment to God in Jesus Christ possible without taking a negative attitude toward neighbors of other faiths, and at the same time it offers a more comprehensive conceptual framework for dialogue with these neighbors. Removing the <i>threat</i> implicit in one-way proclamations, it offers an <i>invitation</i> to all to share in the abundant riches of God. It makes dialogue a normal way of relationship between persons of different faiths instead of artificially contriving to make it a mode of communication. It helps to shift the emphasis from a <i>normative</i> to a <i>relational</i> attitude toward neighbors of other faiths. New relationships may have to be sought through recognizing differences rather than through seeking <i>similarities</i>. It helps avoid the dichotomies <a id="page_117"/>between “we” and “they” or those on “the inside” and those on “the outside.”</p>
<p class="indent">The theocentric circle includes the christocentric circle. It makes it possible to recognize the theological significance of other revelations and other experiences of salvation, a point that for many Christian theologians is frightfully difficult even to admit. Theocentrism allows for an evolving quest for the meaning of Jesus Christ in which neighbors of other faiths can also participate, as in fact they already do, thus opening for Christians undreamt-of possibilities of enriching others and being enriched by them. Further, theocentrism grounds cooperation not on expediency, but on <i>theology</i>, providing a vision of participating with all human beings in God's continuing mission in the world, seeking to heal the brokenness of humanity, overcoming the fragmentation of life, and bridging the rift between nature, humanity, and God.</p>
<p class="subhead"><b>V</b></p>
<p class="indent">Exclusive claims isolate the community of faith from neighbors of other faiths, creating tensions and disturbing relationships within the larger community. But when the <i>distinctiveness</i> of a particular faith is stated in a manner that avoids open or hidden exclusiveness, then meaningful <i>relationships</i> between different communities become possible. This has been happening throughout the history of different religions in the multireligious life of India. It is unfortunate that Christian theologians, including Indians, have failed to recognize the significance of such relationships for the shaping of an emerging theology of religions.</p>
<p class="indent">Perhaps one reason for this failure is the stranglehold of propositional theology and its methodology on the minds of most Christian theologians. This is not to minimize the need for and the importance of serious, rational theological work; rather, it points out that to exclude the cultural, the mystical, and the esthetic from the experience of interreligious relationships is to seriously impoverish theology. Such a claim is based on an understanding of theology as critical reflection on God's relationship to humanity and nature, history and the cosmos.</p>
<p class="indent">Nowhere else than in India, perhaps, is the importance of the esthetic more manifest, for here we find that the distinctiveness of Jesus Christ is expressed through art by persons who do not necessarily belong to the visible Christian community. India might well be the only place where persons of other faiths, without crossing over the visible boundaries that separate them from Christians, have related themselves to Jesus Christ through art, thus breaking down the walls of exclusiveness. These artists, standing outside the confines of institutional Christianity, make evident that it is not the dogmas and doctrines about Christ or the institutions of the church that have touched the heart and mind of India, but the life and teachings of Jesus of Nazareth, his death and resurrection, the illumination he has <a id="page_118"/>brought into the Mystery of God, and the transforming power he has introduced into human life, as he invites all persons to move from self-centeredness to God-centeredness. He is indeed <i>jivanmukta</i>, one who is truly liberated in life, and therefore able to liberate others.</p>
<p class="indent">Visitors to India are often struck by the responses that followers of other faiths have made to Jesus Christ through the religious dimensions of art—literature, poetry, and drama in the different languages of India (including English), as well as painting, movies, and television. Jesus Christ seems to move beyond the structures of the church, with its dogmas and doctrines about his person, in order to establish new relationships with adherents of other faiths. There seems to be an “unbaptized <i>koinonia</i>” outside the gates, which the church is most reluctant to recognize or even talk about. One must indeed be careful not to exaggerate such phenomena. But neither should their importance be minimized nor their theological significance for developing new relationships with neighbors of other faiths be rejected rudely and hastily.</p>
<p class="indent">Over the centuries there have been many examples of this influence of Christ beyond the confines of the church. Among the more recent ones is Manjeshwar Govinda Pai, a noted Hindu poet who won the national award for literature some years ago. His well-known and lengthy poem <i>Golgotha</i> is marked by literary beauty, depth of religious perception, and a sensitive understanding of the crucifixion of Jesus Christ.<sup><a href="#fn27" id="fnr27">27</a></sup> Muliya Keshavayya, a Hindu lawyer, wrote a drama on the life of Christ with the title <i>Maha Chetana</i> (“Great Energy”), bringing out the compassion of Christ toward the poor, and the power of his cross and resurrection.<sup><a href="#fn28" id="fnr28">28</a></sup> Gopal Singh, a well-known Sikh scholar and diplomat, wrote a poem entitled <i>The Man Who Never Died</i>.<sup><a href="#fn29" id="fnr29">29</a></sup> The poet has the risen Christ speak these lines:</p>
<p class="blockquote">But, he said unto those that believe<br/>that nothing dies in the realm of God—<br/>neither seed, nor drop, nor dust, nor man.<br/>Only the past dies or the present,<br/>but the future lives for ever.<br/>And I am the future of man.<br/>To me, being and non-being were always one.<br/>I always was and never was!<sup><a href="#fn30" id="fnr30">30</a></sup></p>
<p class="indent">Many Hindu and Muslim artists have been inspired by themes in the life of Jesus Christ, particularly his sufferings, death, and resurrection. According to Jyoti Sahi, a noted Christian artist, Indian Christian art was initiated not by Christian, but by Hindu artists. For example, there is the well-known painting of the Last Supper by Jamini Roy of Calcutta. More recently, well-known Hindu and Muslim artists like Hebbar, Panikker, Hussain, Khanna and others have painted many themes from the life of Christ.<sup><a href="#fn31" id="fnr31">31</a></sup> All this might well be regarded as “signs” of the increasing “traffic across the borders,” <a id="page_119"/>helping to develop new relationships between persons of different religious communities and bringing out new meanings in christology.</p>
<p class="indent">There can be no exclusiveness in art. By evoking feelings of reference and joy and gratefulness, it transforms human feelings and gives to those who participate in it a sense of inner peace, <i>shanti</i>. It liberates persons from feelings of possessiveness. Some of these examples, and there are many more, make it clear that although Christianity belongs to Christ, Christ does not belong to Christianity. This kind of art by Hindu or Sikh or Muslim neighbors mediates the mystery of Christ to Christians in new ways, different from those of the West, and builds deeper relationships between members of different faiths. This form of art should be regarded as at least one of the new ways of bringing out the relational distinctiveness of Jesus Christ, the theological implications of which have yet to be worked out. To ignore it would be disastrous to future interreligious relationships.</p>
<p class="indent">When theological debates end in sterile apologetics, when social relationships between different religious communities become superficial or degenerate into sullen coexistence, when economic sharing becomes a matter of profit and loss, and when political cooperation in the life of a nation becomes difficult, if not impossible, because of narrow communal interests, quite often it is esthetic experience that provides the bridge for deeper relationships between persons of different faiths. It does not always happen, and when it does indeed happen, it is mostly by the few on behalf of the many. Nevertheless, art combines truth and grace and, in generosity of spirit, through color and sound and symbol and image, it mediates Mystery to a broken humanity. Through participation in art focused on Christ and the experience of enjoying it, the walls of exclusiveness are broken down and new relationships established between persons of different faiths in the larger community.</p>
<p class="subhead"><b>NOTES</b></p>
<p class="noteitem"><a href="#fnr1" id="fn1">1</a>. Karl Rahner, “Basic Theological Interpretations of the Second Vatican Council,” in <i>Concern for the Church</i> (New York: Crossroad, 1981), pp. 81-82.</p>
<p class="noteitem"><a href="#fnr2" id="fn2">2</a>. <i>Guidelines on Dialogue</i> (Geneva: World Council of Churches, 1982), pp. iv, 11.</p>
<p class="noteitem"><a href="#fnr3" id="fn3">3</a>. William R. Burrows, “Tensions within the Catholic Magisterium about Mission and Other Religions,” <i>The International Bulletin of Missionary Research</i> 9 (1985): 3. The same point is made by other Catholic scholars. Paul Knitter remarks that “Christians should seriously consider whether this opening has been toward more abundant life or has now arrived at dead ends” (“Roman Catholic Approaches to Other Religions: Developments and Tensions,” <i>International Bulletin of Missionary Research</i> 8 [1984]: 53).</p>
<p class="noteitem"><a href="#fnr4" id="fn4">4</a>. See <i>Jeevadhara</i>, vol. 9, no. 65, September-October 1981 (Theology Centre, Kottayam, India). The whole issue is on “Inter-Religious Dialogue Today.” See also John B. Chethimattam, “Christian Theology and Other Religions,” <i>Jeevadhara</i> 8 (1978): 352-66.</p>
<a id="page_120"/>
<p class="noteitem"><a href="#fnr5" id="fn5">5</a>. Quoted in “The Extraordinary Synod” (editorial), <i>Vidyajyoti</i> 49 (1985): 106.</p>
<p class="noteitem"><a href="#fnr6" id="fn6">6</a>. “Questions after Vancouver,” <i>Ecumenical Review</i> 36 (1984): 184, emphasis added.</p>
<p class="noteitem"><a href="#fnr7" id="fn7">7</a>. See <i>International Review of Mission</i>, vol. 74, no. 294, April 1984. The entire issue is on the theme “Gospel and Culture.”</p>
<p class="noteitem"><a href="#fnr8" id="fn8">8</a>. See <i>Guidelines on Dialogue</i>, pp. 12-13, for a list of concerns and study questions. It must be pointed out, however, that the WCC Working Group on Dialogue, in its March 1985 meeting, decided to launch a substantial study extending over a period of four to five years on the theological significance of other faiths.</p>
<p class="noteitem"><a href="#fnr9" id="fn9">9</a>. Arthur F. Glasser, “A Paradigm Shift? Evangelicals and Inter-Religious Dialogue,” in <i>Contemporary Theologies of Mission</i>, Arthur F. Glasser and Donald A. MacGavran, eds. (Grand Rapids: Baker Book House, 1983), p. 206.</p>
<p class="noteitem1"><a href="#fnr10" id="fn10">10</a>. John Stott, “Dialogue, Encounter, Even Confrontation,” in <i>Faith Meets Faith: Mission Trends No. 5</i>, Gerald H. Anderson and Thomas F. Stransky, eds. (New York: Paulist Press, 1981), p. 168.</p>
<p class="noteitem1"><a href="#fnr11" id="fn11">11</a>. Asghar Ali Engineer, “Bombay—Bhiwandi Riots in National Political Perspective,” <i>Economic and Political Weekly</i> 19 (1984): 1134ff. “Communalism is a modern phenomenon with medieval trappings to enhance its national appeal. The use of medieval symbolism ensures a relative autonomy to it…and creates the illusion in the minds of common people about the causative efficacy of religion in the whole conflict” (p. 1136). Muslim, Hindu, Sikh, and Christian writers, political scientists, sociologists, and theologians have emphasized this point, which should not be forgotten lest religions be blamed for all the ills of Indian society. See also Kishan Swarup Thapar, “Genesis of Partition,” <i>Mainstream</i> (New Delhi), August 18, 1984, pp. 10ff.; S. Tasmin Ahmed, “Second Thoughts on Secular Democracy,” ibid., pp. 15ff.; Nirmal Srinivasan, “Majority Communalism versus Minority Communalism: Is It a Threat to Indian Secularism?,” <i>Religion and Society</i> 30 (1983): 138 46 (Christian Institute for the Study of Religion and Society, Bangalore). Bipan Chandra in a major study clarifies “the misconception of religion as the sole determinant of communalism” in <i>Communalism in Modern India</i> (New Delhi: Vikas Publishing House, 1984), p. 165. “Communalism was the false consciousness of the historical process of the last 150 years because, objectively, no real conflict between the interests of Hindus and Muslims existed…. Seeing religion as the main inner contradiction in social, economic, and political life was certainly an aspect of false consciousness” (ibid., p. 167).</p>
<p class="noteitem1"><a href="#fnr12" id="fn12">12</a>. Rajni Kothari and Shiv Vishwanath, “Moving out of 1984: A Critical Review of Major Events,” <i>Mainstream Annual: India, 1984</i> (New Delhi), January 1985, no. 305, p. 31.</p>
<p class="noteitem1"><a href="#fnr13" id="fn13">13</a>. See the long footnote by Wilfred Cantwell Smith in <i>Faith and Belief</i> (Princeton University Press, 1979): “The famed ‘religious tolerance’ of Hindus, their acceptance in principle of pluralism as something not merely inescapable but right and proper, has become explicit as a formulated affirmation only gradually and especially perhaps in relatively recent times…. The spirit of recognizing religious life as polymorphic is, however, ancient in India” (p. 215). See also Hajime Nakamura, <i>Ways of Thinking of Eastern Peoples</i>, Philip Wiener, ed. (Honolulu: East-West Center Press, 1978), p. 170: “Generally speaking <i>we cannot find in any Indian religion the conception of the ‘heretic’</i> in the sense of Western usage.”</p>
<p class="noteitem1"><a href="#fnr14" id="fn14">14</a>. In its original context it was a problem that arose within the Brahmanic consciousness, although even to this day this solution is suggested as a way out of <a id="page_121"/>tensions between different religions. The full text reads: “They call him <i>(Sat)</i> Indra, Mitra, Varuna, Agni, or the heavenly sun-bird Garutmat. / The seers call in many ways that which is One; / they speak of Agni, Yama, Matarisvan” <i>(Rig Veda</i>, 1, 164, 46). In another well-known verse, when the sage Yajnavalkya was asked: “How many gods are there, O Yajvalkya?,” the long answer leads the student through the many to just the One—and yet, not just the One, but the One without a second <i>(Ekam Evadvitiyam. Brihad</i>, III, 9, 1-9, and <i>Chandogya, VI</i>, 2, <i>1-3</i>. See <i>Sources of Indian Tradition</i>, Theodore de Bary, ed. (New York: Columbia University Press, 1958), pp. 5ff.</p>
<p class="noteitem1"><a href="#fnr15" id="fn15">15</a>. See Lal Mani Joshi, <i>Studies in the Buddhist Culture of India</i> (Delhi: Motilal Banarsidas, 1977), pp. 177-78. There are others who maintain that the ideas of Buddhism are not original but are dependent on Hinduism, e.g., T.M.P. Mahadevan, <i>Gaudapada: A Study in Early Advaita</i> (Madras: Madras University Press, 1960), pp. 84, 226. Radhakrishnan argues that what the Buddha did was “to democratize the lofty teachings of the Upanishads” (S. Radhakrishnan, <i>Indian Philosophy</i>, vol. 1, [London: Allen and Unwin, 1931, 2nd ed.], p. 471). Although it is extremely difficult to reconstruct past relationships between different religious communities, and one should be careful not to exaggerate the “tolerance” of Hindus, it remains true that when two Chinese travelers, Fa-Hein (5th century C.E.) and Hieuen-Tsang (7th century C.E.) traveled in India they reported that Buddhism was flourishing in northern India with several kings as its patrons. In spite of continuing tensions, “Mutual toleration of prevailing faiths was the general rule of the country during the Gupta period” (7th century C.E.) <i>(History and Culture of the Indian People</i>, vol. 3, R.C. Majumadar, ed., Bombay: Bharatiya Vidya Bhavan, 19641, p. 397).</p>
<p class="noteitem1"><a href="#fnr16" id="fn16">16</a>. The <i>Bhagavad Gita</i>, faced with the possibility of many <i>margas</i> (paths to God), suggested that those who worship other gods, in reality worship Krishna alone, but <i>not properly</i> (IXX:23) or worship him but <i>unknowingly</i> (IX:24). Does not this remind one of certain Christian attitudes today? The <i>Gita</i> goes even further. Krishna says, “Whatever form any devotee wishes to worship, I make that faith of his steady” (VII:21). Also, “in whatever way persons approach Me, in the same way do I accept them” (IV: 11). If Christians can speak of the “unknown Christ of Hinduism,” the Hindus too can talk of the “unknown Krishna of Christianity.” See Daya Krishna, “Religion and the Critical Consciousness,” <i>New Quest</i> (Bombay), July-August, 1978, p. 144.</p>
<p class="noteitem1"><a href="#fnr17" id="fn17">17</a>. Perhaps one has to reassess the lasting effect of the movement led by Ram Mohan Roy in this last regard. Mulk Raj Anand, the noted novelist, remarks that the Samaj movements led by Ram Mohan Roy, “passed over the ocean of Hinduism and produced some ripples but no deep currents” (quoted by Guru Dutt in an article entitled “Will Hinduism Survive?,” in <i>Bulletin</i> [Institute of World Culture] [Bangalore] 5 [1985]: 1ff.).</p>
<p class="noteitem1"><a href="#fnr18" id="fn18">18</a>. In recent years, much valuable research of Sanskrit works has been done. See, e.g., the excellent work by Richard Fox Young, <i>Resistant Hinduism: Sanskrit Sources on Anti-Christian Apologetics in Early Nineteenth Century India</i> (Leiden: Brill, 1981). In the year 1839 John Muir, a servant of the East India Company, published a volume in Sanskrit entitled <i>Matapariksa</i>. It consisted of 379 terse lines in the form of a dialogue between a guru and a <i>sishya</i> to prove the superiority of Christianity as the only way. Three conservative Hindu pandits took up the challenge and published their answers, also in Sanskrit, because at that time Sanskrit was still the <a id="page_122"/>language of scholarship and theological discourse. These were <i>Matapariksasiksa</i> (1839), by Somanatha (Subaji Bapu); <i>Matapariksottara</i> (1840) by Harachandra Tarkapancanana; and <i>Sastratattvavinirnaya</i> (1844-1845) by Nilankanta Goreh. This exchange was a genuinely theological and philosophical debate reflecting a serious attempt to come to grips with the central claims of Christianity and the mood of Hinduism. It was probably far more influential on the minds of people than the English controversy between Ram Mohan Roy and the Serampore missionaries.</p>
<p class="noteitem1"><a href="#fnr19" id="fn19">19</a>. In an article entitled “Politics” in the <i>Illustrated Weekly of India</i>, January 27-February 2, 1946, p. 34. The Constituent Assembly was formed on December 9, 1946. The draft constitution, prepared by the committee headed by Dr. B. R. Ambedkar, was submitted to the Assembly on February 21, 1948. The amendment to delete the word “propagate” was forcefully pressed by Loknath Mishra on the ground that “religious propagation had been responsible for the unfortunate division of the country into India and Pakistan and that its incorporation as a fundamental right would not therefore be proper” (ibid., p. 34).</p>
<p class="noteitem1"><a href="#fnr20" id="fn20">20</a>. Lest this be misunderstood as an uncritical exaggeration of Hindu “tolerance,” it should be pointed out that there are Hindu organizations that indeed manifest a decidedly “intolerant” attitude toward other religions. The Arya Samaj, the Ramakrishna Mission, Rashtriya Svayam Sevak Sangh, the Vishwa Hindu Parishad, and many others are not particularly tolerant of Muslim and Christian efforts to convert Hindus. Earlier, Hindu violence was directed at Jains, particularly in the eighth century C.E. See Burton Stein, <i>Peasant State and Society in Medieval South India</i> (Delhi: Oxford University Press, 1980), p. 80; Romila Thapar, “Syndicated Moksha?,” <i>Seminar: The Hindus and Their Isms</i> (New Delhi), no. 313, September. 1985, pp. 14-22. There has indeed been violent and intolerant resistance to Islam and Christianity, but these were often defensive reactions against both the religious and political implications of conversions. I have drawn pointed attention to these movements in some of my writings, such as “Indian Realities and the Wholeness of Christ,” <i>Missiology</i> 10 (1982): 301-17; “Dialogue and the Politicization of Religions in India,” <i>International Bulletin of Missionary Research</i> 8 (1984): 104ff.; “Dialog statt Kreuzzug,” <i>Evangelische Kommentar</i>, February 1985, pp. 75-77.</p>
<p class="noteitem1"><a href="#fnr21" id="fn21">21</a>. See Charles H. Craft and Tom N. Wisely, eds., <i>Readings in Dynamic Indigeneity</i> (Pasadena: Wm. Carey Library, 1979), pp. 259f.; Jacques Derrida, <i>Writings and Differences</i>, tr. Alan Bass (University of Chicago Press, 1978), pp. 280ff., Paul Ricoeur, <i>Essays in Biblical Interpretation</i> (Philadelphia: Fortress Press, 1980), p. 4.</p>
<p class="noteitem1"><a href="#fnr22" id="fn22">22</a>. See <i>Seminar on Non-Biblical Scriptures</i>, D. S. Amalorpavadass, ed. (Bangalore: National Biblical-Catechetical-Liturgical Centre, 1974), p. 707. I have just completed a manuscript on “The Search for New Hermeneutics in Asian Christian Theology” (59 pp.), drawing attention to the attempts being made in different countries in Asia to shake off dependence on Western hermeneutics and work toward a more relevant Asian Christian hermeneutics. See also Gopinath Kaviraj, <i>Aspects of Indian Thought</i> (Burdwan: University of Burdwan, 1967), pp. 41 ff.; G. Kashikar, <i>Preface to Rigveda Samhita</i> (with the commentary of Sayana), N. S. Sontakka and G. Kashikar, eds., vol. 4 (Poona: Poona Vaidika Samsadhan Mandala, 1946); Thomas B. Coburn, “Scriptures in India: Towards a Typology of the Word in Hindu Life,” <i>Journal of the American Academy of Religion, 52 (</i>1984): 435ff.</p>
<p class="noteitem1"><a href="#fnr23" id="fn23">23</a>. The International Theological Commission appointed by the pope in 1969 has brought out two volumes on this matter: <i>Select Questions of Christology</i> (1980), and <i>Theology, Christology, Anthropology</i> (1983), both published by the Publications <a id="page_123"/>Office, United States Catholic Conference, Washington, D.C. The quotations given above are from <i>Theology, Christology, Anthropology</i>, pp. 3 and 11.</p>
<p class="noteitem1"><a href="#fnr24" id="fn24">24</a>. The full text now reads: “The World Council of Churches is a fellowship of churches which confess the Lord Jesus Christ as God and Savior according to the Scriptures and therefore seek to fulfil together their common calling to the glory of God, Father, Son and Holy Spirit.” See “Ecumenical Foundations: A Look at the WCC Basis,” <i>One World</i> (Geneva), no. 107, July 1985, p. 11.</p>
<p class="noteitem1"><a href="#fnr25" id="fn25">25</a>. Vol. 37, no. 2 of <i>Ecumenical Review</i>, April 1985, is devoted to a discussion of the WCC basis. Two writers, Konrad Raiser and Werner Loeser, S.J., draw pointed attention to the need to take into account the dialogue with persons of other faiths in this connection. Raiser describes this as one of the two “crucial challenges” (p. 18) and Loeser observes that the most central question here is “that of the picture of God” (p. 237). Thomas Stransky goes even further in calling for “a basis beyond the basis.” He repeatedly refers to Jesus Christ as “Lord and Savior” rather than “God and Savior” (p. 21).</p>
<p class="noteitem1"><a href="#fnr26" id="fn26">26</a>. A far more careful and systematic exegesis of related texts within a new hermeneutical framework is called for here. New Testament scholars identify five texts in this connection: Titus 2:13; John 1:18; John 5:20; Romans 9:5; and 2 Peter 1:1. In the text from Titus the use of a single word in the original Greek alters the meaning: “the appearing of the glory of <i>our</i> great God and Savior Jesus Christ.” The alternative reading, equally justified on the basis of the Greek text, would be: “<i>our</i> great God and <i>our</i> Savior Jesus Christ.” Even Paul with his radical christocentrism is extremely careful in his christocentric statements. He reminds the Corinthians, “You belong to Christ, Christ belongs to God” (1 Cor. 3:23). “The total Christian faith, as reflected in the New Testament, is essentially and primarily theistic, that is to say monotheistic, and secondarily Christological” (F. C. Grant, <i>Ancient Judaism and the New Testament</i> [New York: Macmillan, 1959], p. 130). For a fuller discussion, see A. W. Martin, “‘Well Done, Good and Faithful Servant?’ Once More the W.C.C. Basis,” <i>Journal of Ecumenical Studies</i> 18 (1981): 251-66. Referring to “the continued use of a seemingly heretical formula,” Martin asks: “Is it time to retire the formula with the judgement of more or less ‘well done’?” (p. 266).</p>
<p class="noteitem1"><a href="#fnr27" id="fn27">27</a>. Manjeshwar Govinda Pai, <i>Golgotha</i> (Mangalore: Baliga and Sons, 1948). It was written in Kannada, the language of Karnataka, one of the southern states, spoken by about thirty-six million persons.</p>
<p class="noteitem1"><a href="#fnr28" id="fn28">28</a>. Muliya Keshavayya, <i>Maha Chetana: A Drama on the Life of Christ</i> (Mangalore: Kodialbail Press, 1976).</p>
<p class="noteitem1"><a href="#fnr29" id="fn29">29</a>. Gopal Singh, <i>The Man Who Never Died</i> (London: Macmillan, 1969). The poem has also been published in German translation.</p>
<p class="noteitem1"><a href="#fnr30" id="fn30">30</a>. Ibid., p. 77.</p>
<p class="noteitem1"><a href="#fnr31" id="fn31">31</a>. Jyoti Sahi, “Trends of Indigenization and Social Justice in Indian Christian Art,” <i>Indian Journal of Theology</i> 31 (1982): 89-95. See also Masao Takenaka, “Christian Art in Asia: Signs of Renewal,” in <i>Asian Christian Theology</i>, Douglas J. Elwood, ed. (Philadelphia: Westminster Press, 1980, rev. ed.), p. 169.</p>
</div>
</body>
</html>