<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>chapter13</title>
<link href="ebook_style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
<meta content="urn:uuid:e628635c-8169-4333-a0b2-b0f205aae46e" name="Adept.expected.resource"/>
</head>
<body>
<div>
<a id="page_211"/>
<h2 class="chapternumber">13</h2>
<h2 class="chaptertitle"><big>C</big>hristology from an <big>A</big>sian <big>W</big>oman's <big>P</big>erspective</h2>
<p class="chapterauthor1">VIRGINIA FABELLA</p>
<p class="indent">Asian women are beginning to articulate their own christologies. For too long, what we are to believe about Jesus Christ and what he is to mean for us have been imposed on us by our colonizers, by the Western world, by a patriarchal church, and by male scholars and spiritual advisers. But now we are discovering Jesus Christ for ourselves. What we say may not be anything new; what is important is now we are saying it ourselves. To the question posed by Jesus “Who do people say that I am?” we are giving answers that reflect not only what we encounter in Scriptures, but also our reality and experience as Asian women. Thus our christologies are not only interpretations of Jesus, but confessions of our faith in this Jesus who has made a difference in our lives, and not only as a speculative activity, but as active engagement in striving towards the full humanity Jesus came to bring.</p>
<p class="indent">Although women doing theology and constructing christologies have experienced discrimination and “tokenism” in both church and society, ours is a life of privilege compared to that of other women in Asia. The reality, backed by cases and statistics, is that “in all spheres of Asian society, women are dominated, dehumanized and dewomanized…viewed as inferior beings who must always subordinate themselves to the so-called male supremacy…treated with bias and condescension. In Asia and all over the world, the myth of the subservient, servile Asian women is blatantly peddled to reinforce the dominant male stereotype image.”<sup><a href="#fnr1" id="fn1">1</a></sup> Thus, even if this is an attempt to express “my” christology, I need to take into account these countless women, whether they believe in Jesus Christ or not. Jesus’ liberating and human message has meaning for all women struggling for <a id="page_212"/>full humanity and their rightful place in history, for Jesus’ message not only liberates but also empowers.</p>
<p class="subhead"><b>I</b></p>
<p class="indent">Christology is at the heart of all theology for it is Jesus who has revealed to us the deepest truths about God. In his humanity, Jesus revealed God as a loving God who cares for the weakest and lowliest and wills the full humanity and salvation of all, men and women alike. In his humanity, Jesus has shown us what it means to be truly human, to have life abundantly, to be saved. This christology is central and integral to any talk about God, human-God relationship and all right relationships and of any discussion about salvation and liberation.</p>
<p class="indent">There are important issues which any christology must deal with. However, here I will only touch on those that have a bearing on my being Asian and woman, those that are more pertinent to the Asian context and the issue of gender. Feminist theologians in the U.S. have raised the question of the maleness of Jesus. Among Asian women, the maleness of Jesus has not been a problem for we see it as “accidental” to the salvific process. His maleness was not essential but functional. By being male, Jesus could repudiate more effectively the male definition of humanity and show the way to a right and just male-female relationship, challenging both men and women to change their life patterns. Historically, however, christology has been patriarchalized and has been the doctrine of the Christian tradition most used against women.<sup><a href="#fnr2" id="fn2">2</a></sup> Thus the feminists’ question stands.</p>
<p class="indent">An issue facing christology pertinent to our Asian context is the new understandings of salvation in different cultures. Salvation/liberation takes on different meanings within a reality of massive poverty and multiple oppression on the one hand, and of religious, cultural and ideological plurality on the other. In a continent where 97 percent of the people are not Christian, can we claim Jesus Christ as the savior of the whole world? How is he the unique and universal savior when the majority in Asia alone have never heard of him or have even ignored him in their quest for a better world? Some of the Asian faiths offer salvation which relates more closely than Christianity to the soteriological depths of our cultures, to the desire for liberation from both individual and organized greed.<sup><a href="#fnr3" id="fn3">3</a></sup> Have we listened to what other major faiths have had to say about Jesus, especially those who have seriously grappled with his mystery, or have we as Christians tended to be “protective” and exclusive about Jesus?</p>
<p class="indent">These and other pertinent issues need to be addressed in the process of constructing an Asian christology, a process which is just beginning. Theologians like Aloysius Pieris have indicated guidelines for this effort,<sup><a href="#fnr4" id="fn4">4</a></sup> but these have not included anything that speaks directly to women's reality. Though the christology be educed from the depths of our cultures and expressed in Asia's soteriological idiom, the result will not be relevant <a id="page_213"/>unless it takes into account the women's experience, perspective and contribution. Only then can we agree with Indian theologian George Soares that spelling out the place of Jesus in Asia is “Asia's ultimate challenge to Christian theology.”<sup><a href="#fnr5" id="fn5">5</a></sup></p>
<p class="subhead"><b>II</b></p>
<p class="indent">In formulating my christology, I shall reflect on some of the important christological themes and consequent implications. Every christology focuses on the life and significance of Jesus Christ; therefore, the historical Jesus plays a central role. It is necessary to return to the Jesus of history, to the man Jesus who was born and who lived on our continent, whose life was rooted in Jewish culture and religious tradition. By his life, words, and actions, Jesus of Nazareth has shown us the meaning of humanity and divinity. To bypass history is to make an abstraction of Jesus and thus to distort his person, mission and message of love and salvation. Moreover, it is only in reference to the historical Jesus that we can test the authenticity of our Jesus images and see how closely they relate to the reality.</p>
<p class="indent">Jesus’ core message centered on the kingdom of God: The reign of God is near; repent and believe in the good news (Mk 1:15). His central message focused not on himself but on God and our response to God's gift of the kingdom. Seeing God's reign as imminent and becoming conscious of a special call, Jesus proclaimed its coming and urged the people to reform their lives, believe the good news, and be saved. To enter the kingdom meant to change one's ways of behaving and relating. The notion of God's kingdom was a familiar one to the people for it is contained in Hebrew Scriptures and intertestamental literature, although by Jesus’ time it had acquired a variety of interpretations. For this reason, Jesus aligned himself with John the Baptist and accepted John's baptism, for John preached the same message to the “crowds,” the ordinary men and women, demanding repentance. This was so unlike the stance of the other groups: the Essenes, with their passive, elitist interpretation of the Kingdom, or the legalistic Pharisees or aristocratic Sadducees.</p>
<p class="indent">As an itinerant preacher/healer, Jesus drew a following for he performed signs and spoke with authority, and what he taught he practiced. He chose twelve apostles whom he instructed in the way of the kingdom. Although his message was for all, the people he attracted most were those on the fringes of society, those who were in “most need of salvation.” However, not everything Jesus taught and practiced in terms of the kingdom was familiar or easy to understand, accept or follow. His message included what others have never taught: the inclusive character of God's reign. Jesus lived out his teaching by freely associating with, and showing preference for, the poor and marginalized—sinners, outcasts, women. They were the last who had become first; the humble who had become exalted.</p>
<p class="indent">Jesus’ attitude towards women and treatment of them was most uncommon <a id="page_214"/>even for a “good” Jew of his day, for he was not only considerate of them and treated them with deep respect, but even acted contrary to the prevailing customs and practices. Women were among the non-persons in society, mere chattel. But Jesus never ignored them when they approached him for healing; they were human beings worth making whole again. They were entitled to the “life in abundance”; they were worthy of learning the Torah. He not only valued them as friends but affirmed their trustworthiness and capability to be disciples, witnesses, missionaries, and apostles.<sup><a href="#fnr6" id="fn6">6</a></sup></p>
<p class="indent">Jesus taught something else that was new and more difficult still: that love of God and neighbor must include love of enemies. From the time of Ezra, Jews and Samaritans had become irrevocable enemies. Yet by parable and example, Jesus made his point to “love your enemies; do good to those who hate you” (Lk 6:27). The good Samaritan's concern for his neighbor made a model to follow; the Samaritan woman who gives him to drink becomes his missionary to her people. Jesus likewise showed compassion on the foreigner, being touched by a Roman centurion's “faith” and concern for his servant, and allowing himself to be challenged by the entreaties and confidence of a Syrophoenician woman. Thus Jesus showed that to live a truly human life, one lives a life-in-relation, demonstrated by care and service even to the least: the women, the enemy, the outsider. But this was not all. Jesus spelled out what right human relationship is in practice, what it means to “love one another”: there is no lording it over others; even masters shall serve; right relation to one's neighbor has priority over temple worship; discipleship is above blood relationship; only by losing one's life shall one find it. What a liberating message for the women; they were the dominated, the taken-for-granted, the one-sided servers, the “mother of” or “daughter of.” Jesus made clear what being human means; only thus can one enter the kingdom of God. And the invitation is open to all.</p>
<p class="indent">Jesus’ words and deeds brought him into conflict not only with the Jewish religious authorities but also with the Roman leadership. Even as he announced the kingdom, he denounced hypocrisy, oppression and misuse of power. The Romans were threatened by the former, the religious leaders by the latter. Seeing that his end was near, Jesus “bequeathed” to his apostles the basic meaning of his message and ministry at a last meal together. That very night, Jesus was arrested, tried in two courts, found guilty of sedition by the Romans and sentenced to death by crucifixion. Jesus did not resist; he understood the consequences of his word and works in fidelity to God's call.</p>
<p class="subhead"><b>III</b></p>
<p class="indent">For the apostles, Jesus’ death was a shame and a scandal which shook their faith and shattered their hopes. In fact, afraid of Roman reprisals, they dispersed, and only a few disciples, mostly women, remained with Jesus as he died on the cross, to all semblances a failure. But then, the unexpected <a id="page_215"/>happened. The disciples, beginning with the women, started to report appearances which they gradually began to identify with Jesus as they experienced peace and forgiveness. He had “risen from the dead!” The apostles reassembled and recalled all that Jesus taught and did, and recognized God's confirmation of his words and deeds in raising him from the dead. Their new experience of Jesus radically transformed them into people of courage and faith, impelling them to continue Jesus’ ministry and spread his message of salvation as they witnessed to him as their Lord and God. The small Jesus movement/community began to grow and extend to the four corners of the earth. All this “unexpected” is the reality of the resurrection. By his rising, Jesus has conquered death, the “first fruits of those who sleep” (1 Cor 15:20), embodying the advent of God's promise of salvation, signaling the dawning of God's kingdom. By his rising, Jesus is confirmed as the Christ and God's true son, the model of redeemed humanity, the incarnation of true divinity, no longer limited to the particularities of his maleness and Jewishness. Jesus Christ lives and continues to affect, renew, and give hope to the millions all over the globe who would believe and follow him. Jesus Christ is alive and we encounter him in our sisters and brothers.</p>
<p class="indent">The apostles’ resurrection faith enabled them not only to understand God as Jesus revealed God in his life, death and rising, but also to interpret Jesus’ death differently. The apostles and other disciples had taken Jesus’ death as a disappointing, shameful end of an eschatological prophet whose life failed to bring about the kingdom he preached. Their Easter faith, however, told them that Jesus’ death was not a failure but a fulfillment. This later gave rise to varied explanations, but the one that perdured defined Jesus’ death as an offering to God as sacrifice and reconciliation. Jesus is the suffering servant who died for our sakes. The cross acquires a religious cultic significance and Jesus’ death becomes an act of communication with God, “to bring repentance to Israel and forgiveness of sins.” Jesus died as “a ransom for many, whose shedding of blood expiates sins.” Jesus gave himself for a purpose. His death was an outpouring of love. From a negative event, the cross acquires a positive meaning.</p>
<p class="indent">In the course of time and movement across cultures, the positive meanings of Jesus’ death became lost or distorted. In the Philippines, we have developed (or inherited) a dead-end theology of the cross with no resurrection or salvation in sight. Most of the women who sing the “pasyon” during Holy Week look upon the passion and death of Jesus as ends in themselves and actually relish being victims. This attitude is not uncommon among other women outside the “pasyon” singers, and it is not helped when priests reinforce the attitude through their homilies. One of them said not long ago that he does not preach the resurrection as “the people are not prepared for it.”</p>
<p class="indent">In India, the theology of sacrifice thrust upon women is of no purpose. Indian women theologians<sup><a href="#fnr7" id="fn7">7</a></sup> tell us that their women silently bear taunts, <a id="page_216"/>abuse, and even battering; they sacrifice their self-esteem for the sake of family honor, subject themselves to sex determination tests, and endure the oppressive and even fatal effects of the dowry system. A woman who is raped will invariably commit suicide rather than allow her husband and family to suffer the ignominy of living with a raped woman. While we seek in Jesus’ passion, death and resurrection a meaning for our own suffering, we cannot passively submit ourselves as women to practices that are ultimately anti-life. Only that suffering endured for the sake of one's neighbor, for the sake of the kingdom, for the sake of greater life, can be redeeming and rooted in the Paschal mystery.</p>
<p class="indent">The death of Jesus was not only a redeeming event; it was also revelatory. In Jesus’ death, God revealed the deepest meaning and extent of divine love for humankind as well as the true nature of God. Jesus’ whole life was a disclosure of God and God's will for humankind. He always felt a deep communion and intimate relationship with God which was manifested in his being and in his prayer. It was only on the cross that he felt abandoned by this very God whom he called Abba—“Father.” But God was both absent and present on the cross. “On the cross of Jesus God himself is crucified…In this ultimate solidarity with humanity, he reveals himself as the God of love, who opens up a hope and a future through the most negative side of history.”<sup><a href="#fnr8" id="fn8">8</a></sup></p>
<p class="subhead"><b>IV</b></p>
<p class="indent">The nature of Jesus’ relationship to God was only reflected upon and gradually formulated after the resurrection. At first it was simply the application of the biblical titles to Jesus in the light of the resurrection experience: the Christ, Son of Man, Suffering Servant, Son of God, Lord, Son of David. Initially functional, the designations gradually took on a confessional dimension. Eventually, with increasing association with the Hellenistic world, ontological implications were drawn out. Thus through a process of historical growth and theological development, the identity of Jesus in terms of divinity was recognized and accepted by the early church, paving the way for the doctrine of the incarnation, the doctrine of the Word made flesh.</p>
<p class="indent">Whether Jesus is true God and true man, or only seemingly God or only seemingly man, became the subject of intensive debates that were dogmatically put to a halt by the authoritative formulations of the Council of Nice (325 C.E.) and later the Council of Chalcedon (451 C.E.), asserting that Jesus Christ is fully divine of one substance with God the Father (Nicea), the same perfect in his divinity and the same perfect in his humanity, one and the same Christ, Lord, only begotten, in two natures (Chalcedon).<sup><a href="#fnr9" id="fn9">9</a></sup> The language and substance of these christological doctrines betray their historical and cultural conditionings, addressing as they did the disputes of another time and place which do not relate to the vital problems of present-day Asia. These doctrines are no longer of the greatest importance for <a id="page_217"/>many Asian theologians, for, taken as they are, they close off any authentic dialogue with people of other faiths, who are the vast majority in Asia. In fact, in one Asian theologian's view,<sup><a href="#fnr10" id="fn10">10</a></sup> christology has become passé in Asia, because we are still depending on Nicea and Chalcedon whose formulations are largely unintelligible to the Asian mind. Thus the true significance of these councils is not so much their content, but the underlying challenge they pose to us to have our own contemporary culturally based christological formulations. And that is what small groups of Asian theologians, both men and women, are doing—having their own mini and informal Niceas and Chalcedons to determine, based on their context and concerns, who Jesus Christ is for them.</p>
<p class="indent">Just as the formulations of Nicea and Chalcedon have placed barriers in our efforts to have an honest dialogue with people of other faiths, so have our claims about Jesus as the universal savior. In Asia we experience dialogue on two levels, a more formal one commonly referred to as “interreligious dialogue” and a less formal one we refer to as “dialogue of life.” Our experience in the latter where we share the life conditions, pain, risks, struggles, and aspirations of the Asian poor (the majority of whom are of other faiths or even of “no faith”) has made us aware of our common search for a truly human life, our common desire for liberation from whatever shackles us internally and externally, and our common thrust towards a just society reflective of what we Christians term “the kingdom.” In the struggle that binds us, there is an implicit acknowledgment and acceptance of our religious differences and our different paths to “salvation.”</p>
<p class="indent">On the more formal level, Asian theologians engaged in authentic interreligious dialogue (which has mature enlightenment and not conversion as goal) are explicitly questioning our traditional claims about the uniqueness and centrality of Jesus and the universality of Jesus as savior…for all religions. Biblical and historical research and in-depth study of other religions have raised serious questions about our Christian claims. Admitting God's universal love and desire to save, the Catholic position recognizes both revelation and salvation outside Christ and Christianity, but insists that Christ be proclaimed as “the unique mediator of salvation” and God's “unique historical revelation.”<sup><a href="#fnr11" id="fn11">11</a></sup> But is it not possible to claim Jesus Christ as “our” unique savior without claiming the same for all other people? The present direction toward theocentric or soteriocentric christologies seem to be where some Asian theologians are tending as a result of their experience of dialogue, encounter, study and reflection. Jesus himself centered on God and the kingdom and not on himself. As an old saying goes: let us not take the finger pointing at the moon to be the moon itself.</p>
<p class="indent">Theologians proclaiming that Jesus is wholly God but not the whole of God, or that Jesus is the Christ but the Christ is not Jesus,<sup><a href="#fnr12" id="fn12">12</a></sup> should in no way lessen our own personal commitment to Jesus whom we Christians have personally known and experienced as revealer, savior, truth, way, and life. It should in no way disaffirm for us that the “vision and power of Jesus <a id="page_218"/>of Nazareth is an effective, hope-filled, universally meaningful way of bringing about God's kingdom.”<sup><a href="#fnr13" id="fn13">13</a></sup> We believe and confess that Jesus has brought us total salvation; others, however, are making similar claims about their own mediators with the same Ultimate Source of life's meaning whom we call God.</p>
<p class="subhead"><b>V</b></p>
<p class="indent">I shall now examine some implications of my christology for certain aspects of Christian practice, including the use of Jesus images. In particular, I shall reflect on its implications for mission ministry.</p>
<p class="indent">From the start, though I set out to write a christology I can claim as mine, I have tried to keep in mind the plight, concerns, and aspirations of my Asian sisters. In the light of Asian women's reality in general, a liberational, hope-filled, love-inspired, and praxis-oriented christology is what holds meaning for me. In the person and praxis of Jesus are found the grounds of our liberation from all oppression and discrimination: whether political or economic, religious or cultural, or based on gender, race or ethnicity. Therefore the image of Jesus as liberator is consistent with my christology. On the other hand, in view of what I have written, it would be inconsistent to hold on to the title and image of “lord” in reference to Jesus, because of the overtones of the word as used today. In Asia, the word “lord” is connected with the feudal system which in my own country is one of the root causes of the poverty, injustices, inequalities, and violent conflicts that exist there today, many of the victims being women. It is also a colonial term for the British masters which is still used in countries like Pakistan for those who have taken their place. “Lord” connotes a relationship of domination, which is opposite to what Jesus taught and exemplified. “The rulers of the gentiles exercise lordship over them…but not so with you” (Lk 22:24). His apostles called him “teacher” and “lord,” yet Jesus preferred to be remembered as one who serves (cf Jn 14:13-16). Asian women have been “lorded over” for centuries and all the major religions including Christianity have contributed to this sinful situation. The title “lord” would not be in keeping with a liberating Jesus.</p>
<p class="indent">In my own culture, however, not many women would be familiar with the figure of a liberating or liberated Jesus. They know him as the suffering or crucified Jesus who understands their own suffering which they passively or resignedly endure. Many remain unaware of their class and gender oppression and simply live on with a “status quo” christology. Nevertheless, an increasing number of women are becoming aware of our subordinate place and exploited state in a patriarchal church and society, and see this as contrary to the will of a just and loving God, who created both men and women in God's own image. As these women strive to change this inequitable situation within the overall struggle against economic, political and social injustices, they, too, see Jesus as their hope and liberator.</p>
<a id="page_219"/>
<p class="indent">In our quest for a world of right human relationships, Jesus has shown us the way, and therefore Jesus is the norm for our action in reforming our lives and renewing society. Jesus never spoke of human rights or the common good or liberation from oppressive structures, yet his whole life, teachings and actions embodied all of them, manifesting what it meant to be human and to act humanly. He showed us that we cannot work toward our true humanity, our true liberation, unless we seek the true humanity, the true liberation, of all. Thus, efforts to transform the existing structures and patterns of domination that prevent the least of our sisters and brothers from living truly human lives and enjoying just, reciprocal relationships, are moral actions.</p>
<p class="indent">Just as my christology has implications for ethics, so it has implications for ecclesiology and my sense of anthropology and culture. In relation to ecclesiology, I have already mentioned that the present Catholic model admits the possibility of salvation beyond the borders of Christianity. God loves and wills the salvation of all humankind. Thus the church can claim to be <i>a</i> sign but not, as Vatican II put it, “<i>the</i> sign of salvation for the entire world” (<i>italics mine</i>).<sup><a href="#fnr14" id="fn14">14</a></sup> There are other fingers pointing at the same moon. The Church needs to reexamine its sense of “uniqueness” and “universality.” Also, if its dialogue with other religions is to be serious and sincere, then it must reexamine its meaning and use of “definitiveness” and “normativeness.”</p>
<p class="indent">To be a credible sign of salvation and to witness to Jesus’ universal love, the Church as institution has to rid itself of its non-liberating structures and non-loving practices, its exclusive, hierarchical mode of operation. It would do well to retrieve the egalitarian spirit of the early Christian communities. Unfortunately some of today's new experiences of being community are construed as a threat by the institutional Church, instead of as an attempt to live out that spirit which grew from a faithful following of Jesus. If the Church is indeed following in the steps of Jesus, then it should focus, as Jesus did, on preaching and living out the truths of the kingdom rather than in maintaining itself. If the Church is serious in following Jesus, then it should encourage and support all efforts towards inclusiveness and full humanity.</p>
<p class="indent">Jesus intended this full humanity for all, not just for men, or less for women. Men and women have the same human nature and are endowed with the same potentials for “fullness.” Men do not image God more than women do. Yet patriarchy has distorted these truths to promote a hierarchical and complementary model of humanity, which puts women in second place. Women's inferior status has become part of the working definition of being human in Asia, buttressed by the doctrines and practices of the major religions. This has had degrading and dehumanizing consequences for women in all areas of life down the ages, stark evidences of which are still present on our continent today. One of the deplorable consequences is the very internalization of this “ideology” of women's inferiority by <a id="page_220"/>women themselves as part and parcel of our cultures. Part of the work of an Asian christology would be to determine the emancipating and enslaving elements of cultures and religions, to discern which ones foster and which ones impede the creation of a more human and humane life and a more just society.</p>
<p class="subhead"><b>VI</b></p>
<p class="indent">Lastly, there are certain implications of my christology for mission ministry. The understanding of mission has undergone changes over the years and especially of late when the church has been present in almost all parts of the world. Transmission of the message in a transcultural milieu has acquired new modalities.<sup><a href="#fnr15" id="fn15">15</a></sup> Besides direct evangelization, missionaries are engaged in other activities: “witness” on behalf of the Gospel, “prophetic” communication in word and sign, and involvement in personal and social transformation.</p>
<p class="indent">Throughout the past centuries, there has been such an urgency about planting the Church that in preaching Jesus Christ, the stress has been given to the Church he “founded” and its doctrine rather than the reign of God he proclaimed. Indeed, if our mission is an extension of Jesus’ own mission, then we need to refocus on preaching the good news of God (Mk 1:14) and God's reign which Jesus has already inaugurated and will come in its fullness in the future as God's gift. Jesus’ message of salvation was not only preached, but also actualized as something to be experienced in this life. To make Jesus’ message comprehensible to Asians (its core and not its cultural overlays), we Christians need to engage in sincere and humble dialogue with people of other faiths, a dialogue which is as open to receive as to give, that in so doing we ourselves may come to grasp a fuller meaning of God's revelation. To make Jesus’ message credible to Asian women, it must directly touch their everyday lives. Interreligious dialogue that is silent on women's oppression and thus simply perpetuating their subordinate status in religion and society is contrary to Jesus’ saving word.</p>
<p class="indent">Our witness is for the sake of the good news of God's reign; the good news is not just to be preached but lived. Thus our life and work style must conform to the kingdom norms and values. We cannot proclaim a reign of justice, love and peace, while at the same time contradicting its inclusive, non-dominating character in our mission practice and structures. If the kingdom is our focus, then a more collaborative, egalitarian, ecumenical effort in mission will be a more compelling witness.</p>
<p class="indent">Some missionaries will be called to prophetic witness, which is not only to announce the liberating message of Jesus but, in solidarity with the people, to denounce what is incompatible with it. This requires both prayerful discernment and courage. New styles of mission presence will indeed create misunderstanding and provoke resistance, not only from outside but <a id="page_221"/>within the church itself. But suffering and even persecution are to be expected in a missionary's life if indeed it follows the path of Jesus. Suffering for the sake of God's reign is a way of being in mission.</p>
<p class="indent">While many mission societies still insist on the primacy of first evangelization in mission, others have moved on to works of inculturation and liberation, both urgent tasks in Asia. While these are primarily the tasks of Asians themselves, they invite the support and collaboration of others, and missionaries have responded to this invitation. Missionaries are taking seriously what the Synod of Bishops said in 1971, that the mission of preaching the gospel demands our participation in the transformation of the world.<sup><a href="#fnr16" id="fn16">16</a></sup> Thus active solidarity with the people against sexism, racism, ethnic discrimination and economic injustice is truly missionary. For women missionaries all over the world, there is need to explore new mission ministries among, and on behalf of, women who need other women's support, presence, defense, sisterly help, friendship and active solidarity as they awaken to their reality and struggle for their full humanity. In Asia these women are numberless.</p>
<p class="indent">I have reflected on the significance of Jesus’ life, death, and resurrection from a specific horizon. It was my concern, however, that my christology not only express who Jesus is for me, but also recapture Jesus’ life and message in such a way that it can be liberating and empowering for other women. Hopefully my christology will form part of the collective effort of Asian Christian women in search of a christology that is meaningful not only to us but to our Asian sisters whose life's struggles we have made our own. For now this is what I submit as my christology as an Asian woman, knowing that it is subject to additions and revisions, and aware of the fact that the task of christology is ongoing and never really finished.</p>
<p class="subhead"><b>NOTES</b></p>
<p class="noteitem"><a href="#fn1" id="fnr1">1</a>. “Proceedings of the Asian Women's Consultation,” Manila, Philippines, November 21-30, 1985. Mimeographed.</p>
<p class="noteitem"><a href="#fn2" id="fnr2">2</a>. Rosemary Radford Ruether, “Feminist Theology and Spirituality,” in <i>Christian Feminism: Vision of a New Humanity</i>, ed. Judith L. Weidman (San Francisco: Harper &amp; Row Publishers, 1984), p. 20.</p>
<p class="noteitem"><a href="#fn3" id="fnr3">3</a>. Some Asian women question this claim as coming from a male perspective. What Asian women need liberation from is not inordinate greed but excessive self-effacement.</p>
<p class="noteitem"><a href="#fn4" id="fnr4">4</a>. Cf. Aloysius Pieris, “Speaking of the Son of God in Non-Christian Cultures, e.g. in Asia,” in <i>Jesus, Son of God, Concilium</i> 153, eds. E. Schillebeeckx and J. B. Metz (New York: Seabury Press, 1982), pp. 65-70; “To Be Poor As Jesus Was Poor,” <i>The Way</i> 24, no. 3 (July 1984): 186-97; and “Spirit Dimension of Change,” <i>The Way</i> 28/1 (January 1988): 36-37.</p>
<p class="noteitem"><a href="#fn5" id="fnr5">5</a>. George M. Soares, interview by author, 5 December 1987, New Delhi, India.</p>
<p class="noteitem"><a href="#fn6" id="fnr6">6</a>. Paul's claim to be an apostle because he had seen the risen Jesus and received a direct commission to preach the good news applies equally to Mary Magdalene (cf. John 20:16-18).</p>
<a id="page_222"/>
<p class="noteitem"><a href="#fn7" id="fnr7">7</a>. “Proceedings of the Asian Women's Consultation,” pp. 54-55.</p>
<p class="noteitem"><a href="#fn8" id="fnr8">8</a>. Jon Sobrino, <i>Christology at the Crossroads</i> (Maryknoll, N.Y.: Orbis Books, 1978), p. 224.</p>
<p class="noteitem"><a href="#fn9" id="fnr9">9</a>. Dermot A. Lane, <i>The Reality of Jesus</i> (New York: Paulist Press, 1975), pp. 99, 105.</p>
<p class="noteitem1"><a href="#fn10" id="fnr10">10</a>. Francis D'Sa, interview by author, 5 December 1987, New Delhi, India.</p>
<p class="noteitem1"><a href="#fn11" id="fnr11">11</a>. R. Hardawiryana, “Towards a ‘Theology in Asia’: The Struggle for Identity,” <i>Inter-Religio</i> 12 (Fall 1987): 52-53.</p>
<p class="noteitem1"><a href="#fn12" id="fnr12">12</a>. Paul F. Knitter, <i>No Other Name?</i> (Maryknoll, N.Y.: Orbis Books, 1986), pp. 152, 156.</p>
<p class="noteitem1"><a href="#fn13" id="fnr13">13</a>. Ibid., p. 196.</p>
<p class="noteitem1"><a href="#fn14" id="fnr14">14</a>. Cited in ibid., p. 130.</p>
<p class="noteitem1"><a href="#fn15" id="fnr15">15</a>. Donald Senior and Carroll Stuhlmueller, <i>The Biblical Foundations for Mission</i> (Maryknoll, N.Y.: Orbis Books, 1983), pp. 332-39, passim.</p>
<p class="noteitem1"><a href="#fn16" id="fnr16">16</a>. Synod of Bishops 1971, “Justice in the World,” in <i>Renewing the Earth</i>, eds. David J. O'Brien and Thomas A. Shannon (Garden City, N.Y.: Image Books, 1977), p. 391.</p>
</div>
</body>
</html>