<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>chapter11</title>
<link href="ebook_style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
<meta content="urn:uuid:e628635c-8169-4333-a0b2-b0f205aae46e" name="Adept.expected.resource"/>
</head>
<body>
<div>
<a id="page_173"/>
<h2 class="chapternumber">11</h2>
<h2 class="chaptertitle"><big>J</big>esus and <big>T</big>ransculturation</h2>
<p class="chapterauthor1">SEBASTIAN KAPPEN</p>
<p class="indent">Investigations thus far show that the counter-culture Jesus started has much in common with protest movements of our own past. It is also clear that his natural allies in contemporary India are those social and political forces that seek to supersede both casteist and capitalist culture. I shall now try to define the contribution his life and message can make to the creation of a new liberating culture. But first let me briefly state why I speak of Jesus and not of Indian Christianity.</p>
<p class="subhead"><b>THE CHRISTIAN AMBIVALENCE</b></p>
<p class="indent">Indian Christianity has, by and large, retained its imported character. The Christ of theology and popular devotion still bears the marks of his origin in the West. So too the church that made him. Her dogmas and forms of worship took shape in the context of the Graeco-Roman world. No less foreign is the canon law regulating her internal life. The spirituality of resignation and wordly prudence she instills in the faithful derives less from the Gospels than from Neo-Platonism and Stoicism. Still worse, ever new spurious theologies and spiritualities continue to pour in from the West. Small wonder that neither the Christ of the church nor the church of Christ has made any profound impact on the Indian people.</p>
<p class="indent">Christianity has also erred in the opposite direction. It has, in more than one respect, identified itself with the culture of the ruling classes in India. The ethos prevailing in its religious institutions is, on the whole, one of blind obedience, personal dependence, patronage and privileges, while its secular institutions (schools, colleges, hospitals) tend to reflect the values of bourgeois society. Even the caste system has found its way into the ranks of Christians. Politically, Indian Christianity has always sided with whoever happened to be at the helm of affairs. Nor could it have done otherwise. <a id="page_174"/>Only by allying itself with the powers that be could it safeguard its economic interests, especially the free inflow of foreign money. Further, the type of religiosity it represents dovetails, in the main, with that of popular Hinduism. Both religions hold fast the distinction between the pure and the impure, cultic priesthood, the veneration of images, and pietistic devotions. The figure of Christ, who had already taken on the features of a Hellenistic God, became further assimilated to the gods of Hinduism. He has lost much of his uniqueness and has, consequently, little new to give to India.</p>
<p class="indent">The root of this ambivalence lies in Christianity's failure to radically criticize its own self-understanding as well as its understanding of non-Christian religions. To substantiate my point, let me make a brief assessment of the current Catholic position in this regard.</p>
<p class="indent">From the Catholic point of view it is asked, How can the church use the wealth of Indian culture for the fulfillment of her mission? The answer is given in <i>Gaudium et Spes</i> as follows: “The Church, living in varied circumstances in the course of centuries, has made use of various cultures in order to spread and explain Christ's message in her preaching to all nations, to examine and understand it more thoroughly, and to express it more aptly in her liturgical celebrations and in the life of the diverse communities of the faithful.”<sup><a href="#fn1" id="ft1">1</a></sup> On the surface, the statement is beyond criticism, but, in reality, it is riddled with ambiguities. First, the focus is not on the kingdom of God and its justice but on the church. Non-Christian cultures are seen as but a means to explain her message and express her life. Universal history is thus subordinated to the history of the church. It is also implied there is a hard core of liturgy and doctrine that is eternal and immutable, valid for all peoples and ages. There is no recognition of the fact that what is usually taken for the hard core contains much that is the product of the western cultural history.</p>
<p class="indent">This whole approach is based on the belief in the lordship of Christ. The “Decree on the Missionary Activity of the Church” says: “Thus, in imitation of the plan of the Incarnation, the young churches, rooted in Christ and built up on the foundation of the Apostles, take to themselves in a wonderful exchange all the riches of the nations which were given to Christ as an inheritance.”<sup><a href="#fn2" id="ft2">2</a></sup> Now, the lordship of Christ is not a notion that forms part of the self-awareness of the historical Jesus. It is rather the product of early Christianity's search for compensation in the face of the non-advent of the Kingdom. It, in turn, provided theoretical justification for a missiology of conquest. If the wealth of the whole world belongs to Christ by right, what is wrong with the church, his bride, taking de facto possession of it? How very different was the perspective of Jesus who admitted no lordship other than that of the one God! The message of the reign of God would be welcomed by all men and women. Not so the lordship of Christ, as it implies the superiority of Christians over the rest of mankind. The average Hindu would reckon it an affront and an act of theological aggression were he told that the culture his forebears produced belongs to Jesus Christ, just <a id="page_175"/>as any Christian would if he were told one fine morning that all the wealth of the Christian tradition belongs to Siva or Vishnu by right.</p>
<p class="indent">No less problematic is the attempt to define the meaning of non-Christian cultures in the light of the so-called theology of incarnation referred to in the passage cited above. The idea of a pre-existing spiritual Logos who “eventually” became incarnate is to be traced to the impact of Greek philosophy on early Christian reflection. It has little to do with Jesus’ authentic teaching. For Jesus, as for the prophets before him, God is in a sense eternally incarnate as he is encountered always and only in history. Besides, what does incarnation mean in respect of cultures? If it means that Jesus’ message of the new age must assume the idiom and language of the people, none would disagree. If, further, it means that the church herself must become enfleshed in the culture of India, many problems crop up. Is not the church already incarnate in the alien culture of the West? If so, how can she take on the body of yet another culture? Again, what is that culture in which she is to become incarnate? Is it the culture of the ruling classes or that of the ruled? How can a church that has already come to terms with the culture of the status quo identify herself with the culture of protest and dissent?</p>
<p class="indent">Nor may we overvalue the church's role of redeeming cultures. Such a role is implicit in the official pronouncements of the church. One such pronouncement reads, “The good tidings of Christ constantly renews the life and culture of fallen man; it combats and eliminates the errors and evils resulting from the ever threatening allurements of sin.”<sup><a href="#fn3" id="ft3">3</a></sup> Again, “Particular traditions, together with the individual patrimony of each family of nations, can be illumined by the light of the Gospel and then be taken up into Catholic unity.”<sup><a href="#fn4" id="ft4">4</a></sup> Of course, nothing is said here directly of the redeeming role of the church. But in so far as the church is the official interpreter and vehicle of the tidings of Christ, the church too may be said to be entrusted with the task of purifying and illumining cultures. No doubt the message of Jesus can inspire various peoples to initiate a critique of their respective cultures, as has happened, to a degree, in our own country. But there arises the embarrassing question, “How is it that the same message has failed to purge the church of beliefs and practices that are not in harmony with it?” Might it not be because the <i>purifying, illumining</i> power of the Gospel has been neutralized by the concrete reality of the church? If that is the case, the more urgent task confronting her today is to engage in an anguishing self-assessment and self-renewal. Else the non-Christian could well retort, Physician, heal thyself.</p>
<p class="indent">It follows that in order to be a subversive-creative force in Indian society, Christianity must, on the one hand, radically revise its traditional self-understanding and repudiate all complicity with the culture of the ruling castes and classes. What this calls for is nothing less than a revolution of consciousness within the churches. Until that happens, the question as to what contribution Christianity can make to the creation of a truly socialist <a id="page_176"/>culture will remain a merely academic one. Hence our option to focus on the historical Jesus.</p>
<p class="subhead"><b>THE INDIAN PRESENCE OF JESUS</b></p>
<p class="indent">The historical Jesus did not land on the Indian soil directly from some heaven above. Paradoxically, his life and message was mediated by the same churches that had thrown a veil over him. Neither dogma nor cult nor institutions could totally smother his message of freedom and love. The light he was radiated, as it were, through the pores of the organized church: through a witness of service to the sick, the disabled, and the unwanted, and through teaching the Bible as literature. And with Jesus a new humanism entered the mainstream of Indian history, a humanism that proclaimed the equality of all men and women irrespective of race, caste or color. So also a new religiosity indissolubly bound up with concern for one's fellow human beings.</p>
<p class="indent">Unlike the Christ of dogma, the Jesus of history had an impact that reached far beyond the confines of the Christian community. He has left an imprint on the consciousness of large sections of the intelligentsia. Gandhi was deeply influenced by the Sermon on the Mount.<sup><a href="#fn5" id="ft5">5</a></sup> His disciple, Vinoba Bhave, was a devout student of the Gospels. The pilgrimages he made on foot were modelled on Jesus’ sending out the disciples on their mission. The Ramakrishna Mission was founded on the Christmas eve of 1886 after its founder, Swami Vivekananda, told his followers the story of Jesus and exhorted them “to become Christs in their turn.”<sup><a href="#fn6" id="ft6">6</a></sup> Nehru spoke of Jesus as a “great rebel” against the existing social order.<sup><a href="#fn7" id="ft7">7</a></sup> Ram Manohar Lohia wrote: “Christ is undoubtedly a figure of love and suffering, than which there has been no other figure in history. Buddha and Socrates are probably greater in wisdom or even in the fine feeling, but are they greater in love?”<sup><a href="#fn8" id="ft8">8</a></sup> For M. N. Roy, original Christianity represented the revolt of man against the tyranny of the Jewish God and the despotism of imperial Rome, and the Sermon on the Mount contained the highest moral ideals ever conceived by human imagination.<sup><a href="#fn9" id="ft9">9</a></sup> Ambedkar, the author of the Indian constitution, spoke of the Buddha and Jesus as the two personalities that captivated him most.<sup><a href="#fn10" id="ft10">10</a></sup> Not even Indian Communists have anything but praise for Jesus of Nazareth. One of their great leaders spoke of him as a prophet whose ideals and values conformed to the needs and desires of millions of men in their time and for centuries afterwards.<sup><a href="#fn11" id="ft11">11</a></sup> The figure of Jesus has had an irresistible fascination for modern literary writers. Authors of repute have written dramas, poems, and novels on Gospel themes.<sup><a href="#fn12" id="ft12">12</a></sup> Symbols, similes and metaphors of biblical origin have found their way into the language of the people.</p>
<p class="indent">The impact of Jesus, however, was too diffuse and vague and, perhaps, too confined to the educated classes to be a significantly creative force in India. It could not become collective praxis. How could it, considering the <a id="page_177"/>conservative preaching and practice of the churches? As far as the Catholic Church is concerned, the situation changed for the better with the Second Vatican Council. In its wake there has been a renewed interest in the Bible and in the historical origins of Christianity. The perception has dawned on many thinking Christians, and the Jesus of the Gospels is more relevant for their life than much that official Christianity has to offer, that theology and tradition had served to obscure his visage and soften down his message. The encounter with the historical Jesus has inspired them to join popular struggles for justice. It is in this context that we pose the question what contribution the Jesus tradition can make to the revolution of consciousness India needs.</p>
<p class="subhead"><b>WHAT THE JESUS TRADITION CAN GIVE TO INDIA</b></p>
<p class="indent">We should first rid ourselves of the illusion that the Gospels contain the answer to every problem our people are facing. Jesus was no social theorist, no authority on the strategy of social change. But as a prophet whose life changed the very course of history, he can, as will be shown in the pages that follow, help energize the positive forces in Indian society that seek to transcend what is obsolescent in our worldview, religiosity and ethos and to initiate a humanizing praxis.</p>
<p class="subhead1"><b>F<small>ROM THE</small> C<small>YCLE TO THE</small> D<small>IALOGICAL</small> V<small>IEW OF</small> H<small>ISTORY</small></b></p>
<p class="indent">For the average Indian, life follows the pattern of the ever rotating wheel. This is because his view of history has been formed on the basis of cosmic processes. In nature everything follows the rhythm of emergence, decay, and re-emergence. Plants spring up from the earth, grow, and decay, thus returning to where they came from but only to sprout once again in a fresh spurt of life. The seasons too follow a pattern of birth, death, and rebirth. The Indian mind has always thought of man as part of this cosmic process and consequently subject to the law of cyclic return. It sees history as “a perpetual creation, perpetual preservation and perpetual destruction.”<sup><a href="#fn13" id="ft13">13</a></sup> The world emanates from Brahman into which it is reabsorbed at the end of every world period (<i>kalpa</i>) and where it remains in a state of pure potency until it emanates again, thus initiating a new cycle. The world periods and the periods of repose that follow form, consecutively, the days and nights of Brahman.<sup><a href="#fn14" id="ft14">14</a></sup></p>
<p class="indent">Inherent in this view of time is the principle of inevitable deterioration. Each cosmic aeon unfolds itself in a sequence of progressive deterioration. At one end is the age of perfection (<i>Kritayuga</i>) and at the other a period of universal misery, evil and untruth (<i>Kaliyuga</i>). The present human race has been living in <i>Kaliyuga</i> for the last 5,063 years and will have to live through another 420,000 years before it will see the end of this age of ever-increasing decadence.</p>
<a id="page_178"/>
<p class="indent">The cyclic understanding of time has serious implications for man's attitude to life. It may lead him to either indifference towards the past or glorification of it. To indifference, because the unending creation and destruction of the universe makes the achievements of the past devoid of any real meaning; to the glorification of the past, because the principle of progressive deterioration involves belief in the golden age. It is the latter attitude which has characterized the Indian mind to the present day. There is much truth in the oft-repeated saying that India is a country where nothing is forgotten. The tenacity with which people cling to age-old practices points to a certain nostalgia for the bygone. But an uncritical affirmation of the past is not a properly historical attitude and is characteristic of people who have not come of age. Maturity requires that one opposes oneself to the past in order to transcend it, without, however, sacrificing the genuine values realized in it.</p>
<p class="indent">The cyclic conception of time has also prevented the birth of a vision of the future that does justice to true human aspirations. In a repetitive pattern of world cycles there is no scope for progress and maturation. The values of the present are not carried over into the future but are doomed to eventual destruction. All that man creates, therefore, is stamped with the sign of death. Nor is the new creation that follows the night of Brahman any richer for the achievements of earlier ages. The end being nothing more than a mere return to the beginning, nothing new, nothing original, ever appears in history. Such a perspective is apt to beget a sense of futility and boredom.</p>
<p class="indent">The past is no more; the future is yet to be. The present alone is given to man, to redeem the past and father the future. It is in the present that he is called upon to fulfill the task of self-creation. In the cyclic view of things the now pales into insignificance. It is emptied of its unique, irreplaceable quality as one's present life is but a link in the endless chain of existences. Moreover, since the past is not assumed by the present, and the present will not find a home in the future, man is condemned to live in the oppressive solitude of the now. The now contains no other invitation but to flee from it.</p>
<p class="indent">In order to mobilize her potential for self-creation and world-creation, India will have to leave behind the cyclic notion of <i>time</i>. The challenge is not anything unique to her, as though resulting from the very mental constitution of her people. Other nations have had to face the same challenge and have done so successfully. The early Hebrews had a cyclic conception of time. So also the Greeks, even of the time of Plato and Aristotle. But all of them were able to get free of the cosmic wheel and step out into the open space of history. We, on our part, for long got stuck at the cyclic phase. Only in recent centuries were we able to make a breakthrough, thanks to the impact of western civilization and the advance made in science and technology. But the most decisive factor hastening the process has been the day-to-day struggles of the exploited classes, following closely upon the <a id="page_179"/>struggle against colonialism. It is, above all, through organized action that the masses are learning that they are not mere cogs in the ever rotating cosmic wheel but creators of their own future. In reinforcing this trend the Jesus tradition can play a significant role.</p>
<p class="indent">Jesus did not propound any view of history but lived the dialectic of negativity—which is the mainspring of historical growth—to its last consequences. He was born into a tradition charged with the power of a historic negation, the defiant refusal of the Hebrews to slavery under the Pharaoh of Egypt. This negation had for its reverse side an affirmation of freedom crystallized into a project of hope, the hope of settling down in the land of Canaan flowing with milk and honey. The same dialectic of negation and affirmation, of protest and hope, later found powerful expression in the prophets—in their critique of social injustice and political corruption, on the one hand, and in their project of a future of justice and peace, on the other. And Jesus stands out as the one great prophet in whose word, deed and death the dialectic of negativity worked itself out to the full. His no to injustice, religious bondage, and political domination at once sums up and radicalizes all previous prophetic protest and project. And the Cross becomes the most telling symbol of man's refusal to be enslaved and of his resolve to march forward to fuller life. The dialectic of negativity governing universal history finds its concrete, concentrated expression in the personal life and death of Jesus of Nazareth. With him world history enters a new phase.</p>
<p class="indent">From where did Moses, the prophets, and Jesus receive this world-transforming power of negating and creating? Undoubtedly from their experience of God. And here we touch upon what is most specific to the Judaeo-Christian religious experience. The prophets experienced God, above all, as an unconditional challenge to break loose from all fetters and set out on the road to freedom which He himself is. To encounter God in this fashion was to take into one's own heart the absolute negation that the divine is, the negation of all that cripples and debases the human. It was like swallowing a flame, which, in turn, consumes the world. So that whoever met God was bound to exclaim, “Can any of us live with a devouring fire? Can any live in endless burning?”<sup><a href="#fn15" id="ft15">15</a></sup> Such a person became himself a power that creates the world anew. Hence, the relevance of Jesus’ prophetic experience for the millions in India who long to see the birth of a new social order in which every man will be brother to his neighbor.</p>
<p class="subhead1"><b>F<small>ROM</small> E<small>SCAPE TO</small> T<small>RANSCENSION</small></b></p>
<p class="indent">Consistent with its cyclic understanding of human existence, the Indian mind conceives liberation (<i>mukti</i>) as release from history itself. The goal of life is to realize freedom from death,<sup><a href="#fn16" id="ft16">16</a></sup> mortality,<sup><a href="#fn17" id="ft17">17</a></sup> and the womb,<sup><a href="#fn18" id="ft18">18</a></sup> from phenomenal existence,<sup><a href="#fn19" id="ft19">19</a></sup> and unreality,<sup><a href="#fn20" id="ft20">20</a></sup> from sin and the “knots of the heart,”<sup><a href="#fn21" id="ft21">21</a></sup> from good and evil,<sup><a href="#fn22" id="ft22">22</a></sup> from darkness,<sup><a href="#fn23" id="ft23">23</a></sup> from material nature,<sup><a href="#fn24" id="ft24">24</a></sup> from <a id="page_180"/>the bondage of works,<sup><a href="#fn25" id="ft25">25</a></sup> from desire,<sup><a href="#fn26" id="ft26">26</a></sup> from suffering and pain,<sup><a href="#fn27" id="ft27">27</a></sup> and from illness.<sup><a href="#fn28" id="ft28">28</a></sup> The object of the human quest, however, is not merely freedom <i>from</i> but also freedom <i>for</i>, freedom for serenity,<sup><a href="#fn29" id="ft29">29</a></sup> for peace,<sup><a href="#fn30" id="ft30">30</a></sup> for unfailing joy,<sup><a href="#fn31" id="ft31">31</a></sup> for seeing one's Self as the self of all,<sup><a href="#fn32" id="ft32">32</a></sup> for union with Brahman,<sup><a href="#fn33" id="ft33">33</a></sup> for participation in divine being.<sup><a href="#fn34" id="ft34">34</a></sup></p>
<p class="indent">This way of looking at human liberation is based on the assumption that what constitutes alienation is not a mode of human existence but the very <i>fact</i> of human existence. One can, therefore, speak only of liberation from history, not of the liberation <i>of</i> history. Nature and the product of labor are excluded from the realm of freedom. Such a view of the end can create an attitude of escape and act as a mental block to refashioning nature and society. There is, however, in the Indian tradition another view which seems the goal of life in the attainment of heaven (<i>svarga</i>) where man will enjoy the company of gods. Here cosmic existence is not left behind. For, even the gods are subject to the law of <i>karma</i> and <i>samsara</i>. Nonetheless, this view also fails to recognize the liberation of what humans create in history. Hence, the need for a new concept of liberation that is in tune with the demands of collective action for social change.</p>
<p class="indent">Here the Jesuan vision of the ultimate future becomes highly relevant. The reign of God he proclaimed is not a new creation in total discontinuity with past. Nor is it but the last phase in a unilinear evolution of history. It will be rooted in our earth and in our history. “Blessed are the meek, for they shall inherit the earth.” In the humanized universe of the future, man will have land, houses, brothers, sisters, and mothers hundred-fold; those who mourn will have their tears wiped away; the hungry will be satisfied; and all will see right prevail and peace reign supreme. The “new heaven and the new earth” is none other than our heaven and earth suffused with love divine and human. While preserving whatever is good in human creation, it will leave behind everything tainted with sin. Only in this sense of dialectical transcension may we speak, from the Jesuan point of view, of mankind's liberation from nature and history.<sup><a href="#fn35" id="ft35">35</a></sup></p>
<p class="subhead1"><b>F<small>ROM</small> C<small>OSMIC TO</small> E<small>THICAL</small> R<small>ELIGIOSITY</small></b></p>
<p class="indent">Orthodox Hindu religiosity tends to lack genuine humanizing power. True, Hinduism enjoins injunctions and taboos in regard to individual and social life. But the moral law (<i>dharma</i>) is generally assimilated to the cosmic law (<i>rita</i>). The performance of the duties inherent in one's caste (<i>jati-dharma</i>), clan (<i>kula-dharma</i>) and individual avocation (<i>svadharma</i>) is meant to ensure the harmonious functioning of the cosmos.<sup><a href="#fn36" id="ft36">36</a></sup> To be moral in this context means conforming to tradition. Even such conformity is, in the final analysis, no more than a means towards attaining liberation, which lies beyond good and evil.</p>
<p class="indent">Moreover, in the cosmic perspective of unending emanations and dissolutions, the individual person is divested of all absolute value. What constitutes <a id="page_181"/>personhood, the capacity for self-determination, is sacrificed to the determinism of cosmic evolution and involution. And where the abiding value of the person is not recognized, there can be no universal love, no all-embracing solidarity. Instead, one sees one's fellowman either as an element in a predetermined social structure (family, caste) or as an evanescent manifestation of the creative power (<i>maya</i>) of the Absolute, not as a being worth loving in his own right. Only as members of family or caste do individuals become subjects of rights and obligations. Within these institutions the average Indian knows how to relate to others; outside them he is at a loss, with neither norms not guidelines to go by. That is why in the political sphere of bourgeois democracy, which recognizes the equality of all before the law, the Indian behaves as though he is above all law. Equipped with the particularistic morality of caste, he is unable to cope with the universal morality of citizenship. Here lies the root of the crisis of morality in contemporary India.</p>
<p class="indent">The rudiments, however, for a creative morality of universal love can be found in the Indian tradition itself: in the ethical teaching of the Buddha and the saints of the Bhakti movement. They need to be rediscovered and their hidden powers released. Here the Jesus tradition can act as a stimulant. For, the God whom Jesus encountered is one who reveals himself as love and calls upon human beings to love one another.<sup><a href="#fn37" id="ft37">37</a></sup> He is an angry God, angry with all those who trample upon their weaker brethren. Of course, the angry God is not unknown to the people of India. Indian art and the Puranas depict Siva, Kali and even Vishnu as emitting the fire of wrath and destruction.<sup><a href="#fn38" id="ft38">38</a></sup> But theirs is an anger directed not against unlove and injustice but against demonic, cosmic forces. It is not instinct with moral indignation but is a manifestation of the primal creative-destructive energy underlying the world process. The same holds true of most saints and ascetics of Indian mythology. Their wrath is not born of love; it is only a manifestation of the magical energy accumulated through asceticism. In contrast, the anger of Yahweh is the violence of love seeking to exterminate the love of violence on the part of the mighty. Hence, it is that the religious experience of Jesus is charged with the ethical power to uproot and to plant, to demolish and to build up. Only by appropriating this religiosity of creative love will India be able to overcome the divisiveness of caste and the inhumanity of existing social conditions.</p>
<p class="subhead1"><b>F<small>ROM</small> I<small>NDIVIDUAL TO</small> C<small>OMMUNITARIAN</small> S<small>ALVATION</small></b></p>
<p class="indent">The idea of collective salvation is foreign to the Indian religious tradition. Each individual is left to work out his liberation on his own. The reasons for this are both socio-historical and ideational. Historically, what India has succeeded in realizing is some form of organic social unity, not any real community. The nearest she came to a community was in tribal society when property was owned in common and all important decisions <a id="page_182"/>were taken on the basis of consensus among tribal chiefs and elders. But tribal society broke up, giving way to the divisive unity of caste. Within the system of caste, the lower castes were subordinated to the higher ones, and, within each caste, the individual to the collective centre of decision making. Nevertheless, within caste system and within each social group there was at least a semblance of community, some sense of collective responsibility. For, even the servile castes had some rights which their masters could not ignore. Today even this alienated unity is eroded by the disruptive power of capitalist exploitation. And the individual is exposed to the war of all against all. If any genuine sense of community remains it is only in those tribal societies which have successfully refused to be integrated into caste society and have managed to maintain their autonomy. For the mass of people historical experience provided no basis for the notion of communitarian salvation.</p>
<p class="indent">On the ideational plane, since history was viewed in cyclic terms, the community of men and women could not emerge as an ultimate value, destined as it is to be reabsorbed into the Absolute. The belief in karma and samsara also led to the devaluation of the community. How could one have a sense of human solidarity if in the life to come one might find oneself demoted to the level of an animal or raised to the status of a god?</p>
<p class="indent">The attempt to compensate for the loss of community resulted in the idea of the metaphysical unity of all. The Upanishadic equation, “Thou art That” (<i>tat tvam asi</i>) means that the ultimate ground of the individual self and the ultimate ground of the world are one and the same. Which, in turn, implied that, in their profoundest being, all men and women are the same Atman-Brahman. Such an understanding of the unity of mankind could easily be reconciled with actual social inequality. As Ram Manohar Lohia wrote, “Hinduism has given its votaries, the commonest among them, the faith of the metaphysical equality or oneness between man and man, as has never been the lot of man elsewhere. Alongside of this faith in metaphysical equality goes the most heinous conduct of social inequality.”<sup><a href="#fn39" id="ft39">39</a></sup> For the abstract concept of the oneness of all humans not to become an ideology of legitimation, it must be transposed to historical categories and concretized in social relations. Neo-Hinduism, is, in fact, moving in that direction. Here is how a Marxist theoretician sums up the trend: “The self was no more abstracted from life. The self was the social self that could find its fullest being only in social life. Self-realization or the realization of the identity of the individual self with the universal self meant the identification of oneself with the whole community. Man could realize himself only in other men, in the totality of human existence, that of Brahman.”<sup><a href="#fn40" id="ft40">40</a></sup></p>
<p class="indent">The quest for a new societal humanism brings the Indian tradition closer to the Judaeo-Christian. The Hebrew idea of the collective destiny of mankind is rooted in the unity of tribal life, the collective experience of slavery in Egypt and in the organized march into the Promised Land. Jesus is heir to the same idea. The nodal point of his message is not the salvation of <a id="page_183"/>the isolated individual but the final reconciliation and reintegration of humanity as a whole. The project of the reign of God involves the emergence of a universal community, which will sacrifice neither the individual to the collectivity nor collectivity to the individual.<sup><a href="#fn41" id="ft41">41</a></sup></p>
<p class="subhead1"><b>F<small>ROM THE</small> C<small>ULTURE OF</small> F<small>EAR TO THE</small> C<small>ULTURE OF</small> F<small>REEDOM</small></b></p>
<p class="indent">If the West has developed a culture of craving for pleasure, profit and power, India, on her part, has perfected a culture of fear. Fear seems to pervade every aspect of life. There is the fear of being defiled by things, events, gestures, persons. Eating, drinking, sleeping, touching, mating, working, all become potential sources of pollution. Man fears woman as a threat to ritual purity and moral integrity. Woman, in turn, fears man's sexual violence and social dominance. And all, men and women, are afraid of the spirits, good and evil, hovering about and menacing illness, destruction and death. Under the grip of fear, the human spirit withers away and creativity dies. Neither literature nor art nor the sciences could develop in such a climate of fear. No wonder commodity production and artistic creation could flourish untrammelled only outside the pale of caste society as among the followers of Buddhism and Jainism. The ethos of fear, however, is much less in the lower rungs of caste hierarchy and is all but absent among the tribals.</p>
<p class="indent">Of this culture of fear Jesus’ message is the antithesis. He repudiated the distinction between the pure and the impure, a distinction which is at the source of much fear in all religions. True, he believed in the existence of demons, but he showed through word and deed that anyone who surrenders himself to the divine is master over them. By proclaiming the primacy of man over the Sabbath, he set man free <i>from</i> the fear of guilt arising from the violation of man-made laws, and free <i>for</i> the enjoyment of sex, love, friendship and beauty. His message, therefore, is an antidote for that spirituality of self-castration—coupled with its own opposite of naked hedonism and debauchery—propagated by the Brahminic tradition.</p>
<p class="subhead"><b>LEARNING FROM THE INDIAN TRADITION</b></p>
<p class="indent">Every prophet is a product of his age, conditioned by a specific culture and conjuncture of history. This applies to Jesus as well. Though his life and message does set the pattern of authentic human existence for all times to come and for all peoples, they do not exhaust the plenitude of the divine. His religious experience has its own wealth and limitations just as similar experiences in other cultural and historical contexts have their own. The Jesus tradition can, therefore, be enriched by dialogue with other religions. I shall now proceed to indicate some aspects of the Indian religious tradition which the disciples of Jesus would do well to assimilate.</p>
<a id="page_184"/>
<p class="subhead1"><b>T<small>HE</small> I<small>MMANENCE OF THE</small> A<small>BSOLUTE</small> O<small>THER</small></b></p>
<p class="indent">Jesus experienced God as <i>in</i> the world and yet beyond it. But he saw transcendence-immanence more in ethical than in ontic terms. That is, God transcends the world as the unconditional negation of injustice and unlove. He is the absolute Other to the evil than man begets. For the same reason, he is also immanent in the world as the One who affirms human fullness and freedom. To believe in divine transcendence, therefore, means translating into praxis the divine no to whatever degrades the human. Of course, ontic transcendence and immanence are not denied; rather, they are presupposed. This, essentially prophetic, experience of God is suited to founding and sustaining moral endeavor on the part of man. For, the believer cannot leave the scene of history. He has to seek the Unconditioned in the conditioned, the Absolute in the relative. The present is thus endowed with an ethical density and tragic finality.</p>
<p class="indent">But this way of encountering the divine has its limitations. It lends itself easily to an all too anthropomorphic conception of God as a person. Personhood evokes the idea of a centre of willing and loving, distinct from, and opposed to, both nature and other personal centres. Hence, the temptation to view God as standing outside man and nature, as though the universe were something added to the divine. Moreover, it is difficult to experience a personal God as the all-pervasive presence, as the One who is in everything and in whom everything is. So it is important for the Jesus tradition to dialogue with indigenous religiosity which stresses the ontic indwelling of the divine in nature and society. Both in the cosmic religion of the masses and the gnostic religion of the élite, the divine is one with the world of names and forms. In this perspective, God is neither personal nor impersonal but transpersonal, not only being but also becoming, reveals himself not only <i>in</i> but also as nature and history. Openness to this tradition will help Jesus’ disciples to experience the ethical God of the Bible as the Absolute that becomes what he is in and through the world process.</p>
<p class="subhead1"><b>D<small>ISCOVERING THE</small> S<small>ELF</small> W<small>ITHIN</small></b></p>
<p class="indent">While popular religion sought God in the world without, among the élite there was a search for him in the world within, in the inner recesses of the human spirit. The aim here was the discovery of the Self beneath the self, of the Atman that is identical with the Brahman. To this end was harnessed the technique of asceticism and integration called Yoga. Whether an experience of God can be engineered is a moot question. I personally do not think so. In any case, my concern is to highlight the type of humanism this kind of search for the divine promotes. The technique of Yoga involved withdrawal from the world of senses, from the world of action and passion, and the activating of the subliminal forces latent in the deeps of the human spirit. It sought to create the fully integrated man, self-possessed and serene <a id="page_185"/>amid the thousand strains and stresses of daily life. Here is how the Gita pictures the fully integrated man:</p>
<p class="blockquote">“That man I love from whom the people do not shrink and who does not shrink from them, who is free from exaltation, fear, impatience, and excitement. I love the man who has no expectation, is pure and skilled, indifferent, who has no worries and gives up all enterprise…I love the man who hates not nor exults, who mourns not nor desires, who puts away both pleasant and unpleasant things…I love the man who is the same to friend and foe, whether he be respected or despised, the same in heat and cold, in pleasure as in pain, who has put away attachment and remains unmoved by praise or blame, who is taciturn, contented with whatever comes his way, having no home, of steady mind.”<sup><a href="#fn42" id="ft42">42</a></sup></p>
<p class="indent">Admittedly, the spirituality enshrined here can breed cosmic pessimism, escapism, and even absolute unconcern for the welfare of one's fellowmen. It has, in fact, helped the upper castes to reconcile religion with ruthless exploitation. There is also the danger that one may mistake certain heightened experiences induced by <i>yogic</i> concentration for the self-unveiling of the divine. Nevertheless, the pursuit of the inner self has a positive value insofar as it serves as a means towards freedom from the tyranny of lust, acquisitiveness, hatred and violence. It can show the way to that mastery of the self so highly priced by the Buddha, who said, “If a man should conquer in battle a thousand and a thousand more, and another man should conquer himself, his would be the greater victory, because the greatest of victories is the victory over oneself.”<sup><a href="#fn43" id="ft43">43</a></sup> The technique of Yoga can also help create the psychic prerequisites for the humanization of revolutionary praxis. The Jesus tradition must, therefore, incorporate the <i>yogic</i> ideal of detachment in the spirituality of commitment to the Kingdom and its justice.</p>
<p class="subhead1"><b>T<small>HE</small> M<small>OTHERHOOD OF THE</small> E<small>ARTH</small></b></p>
<p class="indent">Jesus saw nature as the object of divine action as is clear from his saying, “Consider how the lilies grow in the fields; they do not work, they do not spin; and yet, I tell you, even Solomon in all his splendor was not attired like one of these. But if that is how God clothes the grass in the fields, which is there today, and tomorrow is thrown on the stove, will he not all the more clothe you?”<sup><a href="#fn44" id="ft44">44</a></sup> Familiar with the book of Genesis, he must also have viewed nature as the object of human action in response to the divine call to fill the earth and subdue it. Yet one has the feeling that there is something wanting in this way of looking at nature characteristic of the Hebrew tradition. It is too male, too aggressive and too remote. There is no real sense of kinship with the earth, possibly because the Jews lived in <a id="page_186"/>desert regions inhospitable to man and beast alike.</p>
<p class="indent">How different is the traditional Indian attitude to the earth! To the Indian mind, nature is not something to be conquered or manipulated. She is the great mother, the womb of all creation, the source of all fertility. The same life force that courses through her veins also throbs in the human body. The Indian sees nature less from the pragmatic than from the religious, emotive point of view. The sense of kinship with the earth finds poignant expression in the great poetic work, Sakuntalam, where the heroine, on leaving the hermitage where she had been brought up, tenderly bids farewell to every plant she had nurtured and the deer she had lovingly fed from her own hands.</p>
<p class="indent">It was from nature too that man learned his first lessons in the art of living. So the Buddha could tell his followers: “Develop a state of mind like the earth Rahula. For on the earth men throw clean and unclean things, dung and urine, spittle, pus, and blood, and the earth is not troubled or repelled or disgusted…. And similarly with fire, which burns all things, clean and unclean; and with air, which blows upon them all; and with space, which is nowhere established.”<sup><a href="#fn45" id="ft45">45</a></sup> For our forebears, nature was also the self-revelation of the divine; the sound of Brahman could best be heard in the rustling of leaves and the chirping of birds and the music of the sea. So in times past the seekers after truth withdrew into the solitude of the forest to feel the divine in the heartbeat of Mother Earth. Even for the common people the things of nature had a symbolic value over and above their mere use-value.</p>
<p class="indent">Today, with the development of commodity production, nature is being reduced to a sum of exchange values. Man's umbilical bond with the earth is being severed and human existence impoverished. All the greater, therefore, is the need for us to recapture something of the traditional aesthetic, mystical approach to the earth.</p>
<p class="indent">Hindus who happen to read these pages might feel somewhat irked by the pre-eminence I attached to the Jewish tradition. True, I do affirm the unique position of Jesus as one who ushered in a new phase in the planetary evolution of the human spirit. He stands for the supersession of all religions including Christianity and heralds a future when human beings will worship God not in man-made temples but in spirit and truth. That future is also the future of India. But the higher phase he inaugurated had already dawned, however simply, in the message of the Buddha and later reasserted itself in the Bhakti movement. But these gropings towards an ethical, creative religiosity could not come to fruition in the face of opposition from Brahminic Hinduism. What I claim, therefore, is not the superiority of Christianity over the Indian religious tradition but the superiority of the humanizing religiosity of the Buddha, the radical Bhaktas and Jesus over the magico-ritualistic religiosity of orthodox Hinduism and the depropheticized religiosity of tradition-bound Christianity.</p>
<p class="indent">If, on the other hand, Indian religiosity can enrich the Jesus tradition, <a id="page_187"/>it is because the former had developed for centuries in the immediacy of man's relationship with nature and society and has for that very reason been able to maintain the sense of oneness of the cosmic, the human, and the divine. Jesuan prophecy must appropriate this sense of oneness and wholeness, while India must make her own the Galilean's dream of the Total Man.</p>
<p class="subhead"><b>NOTES</b></p>
<p class="noteitem"><a href="#ft1" id="fn1">1</a>. <i>Gaudium et Spes</i>, 58.</p>
<p class="noteitem"><a href="#ft2" id="fn2">2</a>. <i>Decree on the Missionary Activity of the Church</i>, 22.</p>
<p class="noteitem"><a href="#ft3" id="fn3">3</a>. <i>Gaudium et Spes</i>, 58.</p>
<p class="noteitem"><a href="#ft4" id="fn4">4</a>. <i>Decree on the Missionary Activity of the Church</i>, 22.</p>
<p class="noteitem"><a href="#ft5" id="fn5">5</a>. See William Stewart, <i>Christian Presence and Modern Hinduism</i> (London: SCM Press, 1964), pp. 62-64.</p>
<p class="noteitem"><a href="#ft6" id="fn6">6</a>. Ibid., p. 84.</p>
<p class="noteitem"><a href="#ft7" id="fn7">7</a>. Quoted by M. M. Thomas, <i>The Secular Ideologies of India and the Secular Meaning of Christ</i> (Madras: CLS, 1976), p. 76.</p>
<p class="noteitem"><a href="#ft8" id="fn8">8</a>. Ibid., p. 79.</p>
<p class="noteitem"><a href="#ft9" id="fn9">9</a>. Ibid., p. 180.</p>
<p class="noteitem1"><a href="#ft10" id="fn10">10</a>. Ibid., p. 151.</p>
<p class="noteitem1"><a href="#ft11" id="fn11">11</a>. Ibid., p. 116.</p>
<p class="noteitem1"><a href="#ft12" id="fn12">12</a>. An instance is <i>Magdalena Mariam</i> (Mary of Magdalene) by Vallathol, Poet-Laureate of Kerala. The new-wave poems in Malayalam by Satchidanandan, Kadammanitta, Chullikad and others abound in Christian symbols and motifs.</p>
<p class="noteitem1"><a href="#ft13" id="fn13">13</a>. <i>Vishnu Purana</i>, 1.7.</p>
<p class="noteitem1"><a href="#ft14" id="fn14">14</a>. Mircea Eliade, <i>Images and Symbols</i> (London: Harvill Press, 1952), pp. 62ff.</p>
<p class="noteitem1"><a href="#ft15" id="fn15">15</a>. Is. 33:14.</p>
<p class="noteitem1"><a href="#ft16" id="fn16">16</a>. <i>Brihadaranyaka Upanishad</i>, 3.1.5.</p>
<p class="noteitem1"><a href="#ft17" id="fn17">17</a>. Ibid., 1.3.38.</p>
<p class="noteitem1"><a href="#ft18" id="fn18">18</a>. <i>Svetasvatara Upanishad</i>, 3.2.5; also Gita, 13:24,26.</p>
<p class="noteitem1"><a href="#ft19" id="fn19">19</a>. <i>Mundaka Upanishad</i>, 3.2.5.</p>
<p class="noteitem1"><a href="#ft20" id="fn20">20</a>. <i>Brihadaranyaka Upanishad</i>, 1.3.28.</p>
<p class="noteitem1"><a href="#ft21" id="fn21">21</a>. <i>Mundaka Upanishad</i>, 3.2.8.</p>
<p class="noteitem1"><a href="#ft22" id="fn22">22</a>. Gita, 6:9.</p>
<p class="noteitem1"><a href="#ft23" id="fn23">23</a>. <i>Brihadaranyaka Upanishad</i>, 1.3.28.</p>
<p class="noteitem1"><a href="#ft24" id="fn24">24</a>. Gita, 13-34.</p>
<p class="noteitem1"><a href="#ft25" id="fn25">25</a>. Ibid., 2:29; 2:28.</p>
<p class="noteitem1"><a href="#ft26" id="fn26">26</a>. Ibid., 6:24.</p>
<p class="noteitem1"><a href="#ft27" id="fn27">27</a>. Ibid., 6:23.</p>
<p class="noteitem1"><a href="#ft28" id="fn28">28</a>. Ibid., 2:71.</p>
<p class="noteitem1"><a href="#ft29" id="fn29">29</a>. Ibid., 2:64.</p>
<p class="noteitem1"><a href="#ft30" id="fn30">30</a>. Ibid., 2:70; 4:39; 5:12.</p>
<p class="noteitem1"><a href="#ft31" id="fn31">31</a>. Ibid., 5:21.</p>
<p class="noteitem1"><a href="#ft32" id="fn32">32</a>. Ibid., 5:7.</p>
<p class="noteitem1"><a href="#ft33" id="fn33">33</a>. Ibid., 5:24; 6:27; 14:26.</p>
<p class="noteitem1"><a href="#ft34" id="fn34">34</a>. Ibid., 8:5; 13:18.</p>
<p class="noteitem1"><a href="#ft35" id="fn35">35</a>. S. Kappen, <i>Jesus and Freedom</i> (Maryknoll, N.Y.: Orbis Books, 1977), pp. 53-67.</p>
<a id="page_188"/>
<p class="noteitem1"><a href="#ft36" id="fn36">36</a>. Heinrich Zimmer, <i>Myths and Symbols in Indian Art and Civilization</i> (New York: HarperTorch Books, 1962), pp. 13-16.</p>
<p class="noteitem1"><a href="#ft37" id="fn37">37</a>. Kappen, pp. 60-64.</p>
<p class="noteitem1"><a href="#ft38" id="fn38">38</a>. <i>Hindu Myths</i>, Penguin Classics, 1975, passim.</p>
<p class="noteitem1"><a href="#ft39" id="fn39">39</a>. Thomas, p. 70.</p>
<p class="noteitem1"><a href="#ft40" id="fn40">40</a>. K. Damodaran, <i>Man and Society in Indian Philosophy</i> (New Delhi: People's Publishing House, 1970), pp. 81-82.</p>
<p class="noteitem1"><a href="#ft41" id="fn41">41</a>. Kappen, pp. 97-98.</p>
<p class="noteitem1"><a href="#ft42" id="fn42">42</a>. <i>Gita</i>, 12:13-20.</p>
<p class="noteitem1"><a href="#ft43" id="fn43">43</a>. <i>Dhammapada</i>, tr. Juan Mascaro (Penguin Classics, 1978), p. 50.</p>
<p class="noteitem1"><a href="#ft44" id="fn44">44</a>. Mt. 6:30.</p>
<p class="noteitem1"><a href="#ft45" id="fn45">45</a>. <i>Majjhima Nikaya</i>, see <i>Sources of Indian Tradition</i>, comp. William Theodore de Bary, et al. (Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass, 1988, reprint), pp. 111-112.</p>
</div>
</body>
</html>