<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>chapter06</title>
<link href="ebook_style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
<meta content="urn:uuid:e628635c-8169-4333-a0b2-b0f205aae46e" name="Adept.expected.resource"/>
</head>
<body>
<div>
<a id="page_85"/>
<h2 class="chapternumber">6</h2>
<h2 class="chaptertitle"><big>T</big>he <big>P</big>luralism of <big>R</big>eligions and the <big>S</big>ignificance of <big>C</big>hrist</h2>
<p class="chapterauthor">MICHAEL AMALADOSS</p>
<p class="indent">A growing positive attitude to the possibility of salvation in and through other religions seems to undermine traditional faith in Christ as the unique and universal savior. If we are helping Hindus and Muslims to grow in their own faith, are we not being disloyal to our mission to proclaim Jesus Christ as their savior? Who is Christ for us? How do we understand him and his role in salvation, particularly in relation to the other religions? We are asking these questions not in the abstract, a priori, but in the context of our experience of other religions in India. We are living in a situation of religious pluralism.<sup><a href="#fnr1" id="fn1">1</a></sup> There is a wide acceptance today of the idea that people are saved not only in spite of, but in and through their religions, because God has reached out to them in the context of their life, community, and history. This realization is not so much the conclusion of an argument as born out of a living experience of other believers. The question is how we are to reconcile this universal salvific will of God with an individual act of salvation in the death and resurrection of Jesus.</p>
<p class="indent">I shall try to answer this question in four stages. I shall, first of all, outline rather schematically and critically the present stage of discussion on the question. Then I shall specify my own method of approach. Thirdly, I shall present some new perspectives that must guide our search for an answer. Finally I shall indicate my response to the question. I shall then point out in the conclusion some implications for action. I am aware that this is a difficult question and I do not claim to have found <i>the</i> answer to it. I will be satisfied if I have clarified the question a little more and localized more precisely the mystery.</p>
<a id="page_86"/>
<p class="subhead"><b>SEARCH FOR A NEW PARADIGM</b></p>
<p class="indent">Authors who have studied this problem in recent times are accustomed to speak of three broad paradigms that classify the answers usually given by theologians: exclusivism, inclusivism and pluralism. As there are many excellent surveys of these trends,<sup><a href="#fnr2" id="fn2">2</a></sup> it is enough for me here to present them schematically in order to provide a context for our reflection. We should, however, keep in mind that such schemes tend to ignore nuances in particular theoretical positions.</p>
<p class="indent">The <i>exclusivists</i> say that no one will be saved unless that person confesses explicit faith in Jesus Christ as the savior. Other religions may have many good things in them as the best fruits of human reflection and effort. But they do not mediate salvation. The Church is the only way to salvation.</p>
<p class="indent">The <i>inclusivists</i> accept that there may be grace and revelation in other religions, so that they may mediate salvation to those who believe in them. But the salvation they mediate is salvation in Jesus Christ. Even if the other believers may not be aware of the fact, they are “anonymous” Christians, related to the Church in some hidden way. Jesus Christ and the Church are then considered the fulfillment of the other religions, and Jesus Christ is the center of the history of salvation.</p>
<p class="indent">The <i>pluralists</i> find this inclusive attitude a patronizing one. They prefer to say that all religions are ways to the Ultimate, each in its own manner. As Christ is the way for the Christians, so is Buddha the way for Buddhists and Krishna or Rama for Hindus. They opt for a “theocentric,” as opposed to a “christocentric,” perspective of history.</p>
<p class="indent">I find all three paradigms unsatisfactory. The exclusivists are simply negative to all other religions and they ignore the broad Christian tradition that has accepted the possibility of salvation for people outside the Church—even though this may have been explained in various ways. After the Second Vatican Council and the event of Assisi, October 1986, when the Pope came together with the members of other religions, to pray for peace, no Catholic can be an exclusivist.</p>
<p class="indent">The inclusivist position is the one most common today. In the context of other religions, its ecclesiocentrism is a problem. To say that someone is an anonymous Christian when one explicitly rejects membership either in the Church or belief in Jesus Christ as unique savior seems presumptuous. Other religions, while they are respected by inclusivists, are placed in a relation with Christianity as “partial” to “full” or as “unconscious” to “conscious.” This is an improperly a priori Christian solution to the problem.</p>
<p class="indent">The pluralists, on the other hand, do not take the “otherness” of other religions seriously. Real differences, even contradictions, among the religions are played down, while the search for an underlying unity ends up with a lowest-common-denominator rubric such as liberation or human <a id="page_87"/>development or the unity of the human race proposed as common to all religious traditions. One could, of course, develop a theology of religions that is soteriocentric because all religions seek to lead to liberation and salvation is a more unifying element than even God. The problem, though, is not to find a point of agreement among religions, but to prove that they are different ways to the same goal. Specificity of faith commitments is not considered. For example, Christ can be considered simply one among many ways only if he can be reduced to being a mere man. For those to whom Christian uniqueness is a myth, the God-incarnate is also a myth.<sup><a href="#fnr3" id="fn3">3</a></sup> Just as Christians will not recognize the Christ of faith in the pluralists’ presentation, neither will Buddhists find their Buddha, nor Hindus their Krishna. Paradoxically, pluralism itself becomes a form of nominalism reducing radically different expressions of religiosity to the same reality or experience. Such a rational conceptual approach looks on religions as systems of doctrine or practice that one can compare from some imaginary vantage point outside all religions and thus ends in simplistic abstractions.<sup><a href="#fnr4" id="fn4">4</a></sup></p>
<p class="subhead"><b>A METHODOLOGICAL FRAMEWORK</b></p>
<p class="indent">The context of our discussion is a community of people living and working together, sharing a common culture and socio-political structures, but belonging to different religions. The role of religion is to be a prophetic, interpretive force in the life of the people. Where there are many religions they have to play this prophetic role in dialogue. We favor neither a secular society without religion, nor fundamentalistic communalism where religions become a political force. Even at the religious level our task is not only to witness actively<sup><a href="#fnr5" id="fn5">5</a></sup> to our faith (as some evangelicals do), but also treat other believers with respect and tolerance and collaborate with them in common socio-cultural and political tasks like the promotion of peace and development, freedom and human rights. We have not only a mission to witness to our faith, but also a responsibility as members of a human community. A school, for instance, is not a propaganda institution, but should render public service to the community and has responsibilities that a parish church may not have.</p>
<p class="indent">Our approach will not be an a priori one. I do not start from a self-understanding as a Christian and beliefs about means of salvation, from this point of view judging from the outside other religions and their role in the history of salvation. Our approach here will be dialogical. We listen to the other believers, and are challenged by their faith and life. Even if we do not actually dialogue with them, we have to be present to them in mind and imagination as we reflect on the meaning—for our faith—of this multireligious situation. It is in the context of this relationship that we seek to rediscover our identity.</p>
<p class="indent">The horizon of our search for understanding is our own faith perspective. We are not engaged in a historical or phenomenological study. We are not <a id="page_88"/>studying religions objectively as systems of doctrines or behavior. We do not pretend to adopt a neutral, suprareligious perspective. Since our horizon is our faith and we are dialoguing with other peoples of faith, our approach is not rational or scientific in the normal sense. Searching as believers we cannot escape the “hermeneutical circle.” We have to explore a vision to which we are committed in faith; and we cannot look at it from outside this horizon.</p>
<p class="indent">We are not searching for an abstract universal scheme that will somehow unify all religions. We are not engaged in an evaluative, comparative study. We are searching to make place for other believers in the perspective of our own faith, while respecting the identities of the others without somehow reducing them to or interpreting them in terms of our own. This is the reason why an approach in faith is not opposed to an attitude of dialogue. Neither accepting that we are simply different, nor trying to reduce the other's identity to one's own, we seek to make space for the other in the context of our own faith, leaving to the activity of dialogue the discovery of the concrete articulations of the interrelationships, because we believe that God is one and has a single plan for the universe which includes all these various manifestations. These methodological elements will become clearer as we proceed with our reflection.</p>
<p class="subhead"><b>ELEMENTS OF A NEW PARADIGM</b></p>
<p class="subhead1"><b>R<small>ELATIONSHIP AND</small> S<small>TRUCTURE</small></b></p>
<p class="indent">If we take a merely phenomenological approach we see religion as a system of doctrines, rituals, and rules for behavior. But religion is more basically a saving relationship between God and the human person. In the context of human life in community, God calls and the human person responds. Conscience and freedom have an essential role in this process. There is an interplay of two freedoms which is a source of pluralism. For instance, God for Christians is Parent, Son, and Spirit. However this plurality in God may be understood, it guarantees a plurality of personal relationships with God. Since the affirmation of God as Parent, Son, and Spirit is not an a priori declaration, but the expression of the pluralistic experience of God in the history of salvation, this possibility of pluralism is of more importance than an abstract unity of the Godhead or of the Ultimate. While it is legitimate to talk of unity in pluralism, any attempt to reduce pluralism to an abstract unity is a rational temptation.<sup><a href="#fnr6" id="fn6">6</a></sup></p>
<p class="indent">The saving relationship between God and the human person is lived in the context of a culture and of a history. These will certainly influence the concrete forms in which the relationship finds expression. The concrete forms of expression not only symbolically mediate the relationship, but also give visibility to it and in some way constitute it. These forms of expression in scriptures, rituals and organizational structures constitute a tradition. <a id="page_89"/>The experience of relationship is lived through them even if it transcends them. When I love a person, it is not simply an abstract feeling—I give it symbolic expression. I live my love in and through this expression—even if my love is not reduced to this expression. This expression is not simply a medium of communication nor an instrument. It is rather my love in act. While, on the one hand, I can live the intensity of my love even in inadequate expressions of it, on the other hand, I will have to confess that my expression is inevitably limited by culture, history and my own personal inadequacies. In addition, my response may not be all pure and true—there may be such factors operative as mixed motives and hesitations.</p>
<p class="indent">In this network of relationship and expression that is the core of religion, one can point to a pair of dialectical poles that constitute a field within which the relationship is lived—namely, the <i>Absolute</i> and the <i>relative</i>. The personal relationship as commitment in faith has a unique and absolute character about it, particularly because it is a relationship to the Absolute. The symbolic expression of it is culturally, historically and humanly conditioned and therefore relative. The Absolute and the relative are not two different things, but two poles of one relationship—like the spirit and the body intrinsically linked in human personality. I am not talking here of the obvious pair—the Absolute (God) and the relative (the human person). I am, rather, talking of the absoluteness of faith as commitment to the Ultimate and the relativity of its expression in religion. Human fault and error contribute further to the relativity. It is in and through the relative that the absolute relationship is lived. Even when God becomes human in Jesus, God cannot but become part of the cultural context of the Jewish tradition and language and in the historical context of the time in which Jesus lived. But the relative expression does not relativize the absolute relationship. In an earlier paper I distinguished between faith as experience, faith as celebration and faith as reflection.<sup><a href="#fnr7" id="fn7">7</a></sup> Aloysius Pieris distinguishes between core-experience, collective memory and interpretation.<sup><a href="#fnr8" id="fn8">8</a></sup> Panikkar speaks of Christianness, Christianity and Christendom.<sup><a href="#fnr9" id="fn9">9</a></sup> The poles I am talking of here will be experience on the one hand and the other two aspects taken together on the other.</p>
<p class="indent">If we look at various religions as structures of expression, we may speak about the more or less developed; the tribal and the great; the popular and the elite; the mystical and the prophetic religions. These classifications are meaningful at a certain level. But we cannot legitimately thus compare religions as simply relative to one another because they have no meaning in themselves apart from concrete relations between members of the respective traditions. Each religion is capable, in its own historico-cultural situation, of giving expression to an absolute relationship. Therefore religions are relative to this absolute relationship and not to one another. Authentic dialogue is not between religions, which are seen as complementing one another, but between persons, who may mutually enrich themselves. Conversion is not the result of a choice of the best that follows a <a id="page_90"/>comparative study of religions but the response to the manifestation and call of God in and through a particular tradition. Sinful or imperfect elements in a religion are always to be judged in terms of the Absolute which it mediates in its expression.</p>
<p class="indent">At a phenomenological level, concepts like revelation, scripture and prophet, may have a certain basic common denotation. But it would not be proper to make that the sole basis for a comparison, since they are fully meaningful only within a tradition, not in the abstract. In the context of the ongoing relationship between God and a community, a particular person may be given by God a prophetic role; the community may recognize that person as a prophet; other believers in dialogue within that community may recognize this prophetic role in that community. Nevertheless such recognition does not automatically imply an affirmation that prophets have the same role for <i>every</i> community. We could say the same thing about the scriptures and the foundational symbols of a community. Many people reading the Bible may recognize Jesus as a great man whose teaching and example have universal relevance. But only a Christian in his faith confesses him as the incarnate Word.</p>
<p class="indent">If we take the dialectical relationship between the absolute and the relative poles of religion seriously, then to say that all religions are only different expressions of the same experience is not correct. It is also a fashion to affirm that at the mystical level one is beyond name and form, and that mystical experience is the same in all religions. It is true that at the root of any authentic religious experience there is the same God. But to conclude from this that it is the same experience is to ignore, on the one hand, the various ways in which God can manifest Godself and, on the other, the various cultural and symbolic ways in which the human person lives such an experience. Given the spirit-in-body nature of the human person, one cannot question the possibility of an experience of the Absolute beyond name and form as much as the possibility of the experience itself being beyond name or form or identification of it as the same experience as those common in another tradition.</p>
<p class="indent">The main point I wish to make here is that we are not interested in a comparison of religions as systems which can be objectively analyzed, but in a dialogue between believers who are able to make an absolute commitment of faith in and through their religions to the God who is manifested in various ways.</p>
<p class="subhead1"><b>I<small>T</small> I<small>S</small> G<small>OD</small> W<small>HO</small> S<small>AVES</small></b></p>
<p class="indent">We are accustomed to speak of the salvific value of religions. This is obviously inaccurate. It is always God who saves, not religions. People may be saved <i>in</i> and <i>through</i> a religion, but not <i>by</i> it. Religions are but mediations that do not substitute for but only make present God's saving love. Some would say that it is faith which saves, not religion. But such a distinction is <a id="page_91"/>questionable in the light of what we have seen in the previous section about the two poles of religion. This ever present action of God in salvation is sometimes obscured by the way we speak. For example, the Latin church has always had an anxiety to affirm its legitimacy in ontological terms. One speaks of the Church as a sacrament and sacraments are described as causes. The priest is said to be acting “in persona Christi.” Active statements like “I absolve you,” and “I baptize you,” are preferred. Such a manner of speaking may obscure a presence of the Spirit and of Christ in sacramental celebrations in which the role of the church is only ministerial and not representative. The Orthodox tradition is much more sensitive to the continuing action of God through his Spirit which the Church prays for. The difference is seen clearly in the famous dispute concerning the key moment of the eucharistic prayer—the institution narrative or the epiclesis. This overall orientation may tempt the Latin church to reduce God's action to the Church's action and to make the Church's mediation essential, while the Orthodox tradition makes place for God's continuing action not only in, but also outside the sacramental and ecclesial system. This is the principle of “economy.”</p>
<p class="indent">Speaking of the primacy of God's action in salvation will also help us not to isolate God's action in Jesus, but to set it in the context of the totality of God's action in the world seeking to communicate Godself to human beings which embraces the whole process of history from creation through redemption to its ultimate consummation. We see in the Old Testament how the people starting from their experience of liberation from Egypt through an intervention of God move to recognizing Yahweh both as the creator in the beginning and as the re-creator of the world in the last times. We see the same process in the New Testament, particularly in John and Paul. The experience of Jesus leads them to the discovery of the Word (John 1:1–14) and of the Cosmic Christ and the Spirit (Eph. 1:3–13; Rom. 8). Such a total perspective will dissuade us from opposing creation to redemption as natural to supernatural. A global view will also discourage us both from a dichotomous approach to the religions as Church and non-Church (exclusivism) and from an easy irenicism that sees religions as different human efforts towards the one God (superficial pluralism). We would better respect the pluralism of religions in history and seek for their articulation into a unity according to the plan of the one God. A historical perspective would also make us see this unity not as a system that is already given, but as a unification that has to be achieved, built up, realized both by the Spirit and by us, precisely through dialogue and mission.</p>
<p class="indent">Speaking of God's action in salvation is a reminder to us that in the realm of religion nothing is purely human. God is always present and active in creation and in history.<sup><a href="#fnr10" id="fn10">10</a></sup> This is the meaning of the universal salvific will of God. This presence is articulated in various manifestations that are ordained to a unity. This does not mean that all manifestations are the same or of the same value. It does not mean either that the human response <a id="page_92"/>is not conditioned by sin and imperfection, or even by refusal. But it does mean that we must always have a global perspective. God manifests Godself in various ways to various persons and groups in sovereign freedom. Such manifestations are not arbitrary, but ordained to the global plan of God for humankind. A particular manifestation may be more or less important to God's plan. This can be discovered only through revelation and a posteriori in history. There is no problem in recognizing the differences between tribal, folk, and great religions. But even such religious development need not be seen as the result of purely human efforts.</p>
<p class="indent">While every divine manifestation is a personal or community experience, some of them, if not all, may also have a social implication. For everyone, the manner in which God reaches out to that person is adequate for that person's salvation.<sup><a href="#fnr11" id="fn11">11</a></sup> But God's manifestations, as God's gifts and charisms (see 1 Cor. 12:4–11), may have a significance for the human community. Such a gift gives the person or the community a particular mission (role) in history. Such a role and the gifts ordained to it are a call and a responsibility; they are not titles for honor or for a feeling of superiority. No religion is closed in on itself. It is always called to be an open structure. Ultimately one is judged by the depth and the generosity of one's response to the call of God and not by the special gifts one is given for the sake of the community. A Christian is not more favored than a follower of a tribal religion at this level, but the Christian <i>is</i> aware of a connection to God's mission of which the tribal is not aware.</p>
<p class="subhead1"><b>J<small>ESUS</small> I<small>S THE</small> C<small>HRIST</small></b></p>
<p class="indent">One of the problems that we face when we speak of Jesus as the Christ in the context of other religions is reductionism. In the past, the Catholic tradition—in spite of the Chalcedonian definition that Jesus Christ is true God and true human being and that these two aspects should neither be confused nor separated—tended to focus on his divine aspect, even when it spoke of the sufferings of Jesus. Today there is a move to rediscover and emphasize his true humanity. It is obviously difficult to hold these two aspects of the mystery in tension. In the New Testament we see the first disciples experiencing the man Jesus and, through reflection on his life and action, especially his death and resurrection, growing in their understanding of his divine aspect. The complexity of this personality of Jesus is expressed in various ways in the New Testament and later. Today we might need to find new ways of expressing this mystery. But if we simply reduce Jesus to being a human person, however extraordinary, then the questions of theological uniqueness and eschatological universality do not arise.</p>
<p class="indent">The first question that we have to ask when we talk about Jesus Christ is: Who is Christ <i>for us</i>? Are we talking of the <i>Word</i> in whom everything was created and who was at the beginning enlightening every one coming into the world (John 1:3–5, 9) or of <i>Jesus</i>, the Word incarnate, who emptied <a id="page_93"/>himself and took the form of a servant and died on the cross (Phil. 2:6–11) or the <i>risen Christ</i> who is transhistorical, no longer bound by space and time, present and active among us but whose action in the Spirit we cannot limit to our own little efforts (Acts 10), or the <i>Christ at the end of time</i>, the pleroma, in whom all fullness will dwell (Eph. 1:23)? It is the same person, but a person who is in the process of history while simultaneously transcending it. We should not forget this dynamic complexity of the person of Christ or that part of the complexity is the diversity of the relationships he displays in virtue of that complexity. The divine and the historical human poles of this complexity are sometimes specified with the terms “Christ” and “Jesus.” Jesus is the Christ, but the Christ is not only Jesus.<sup><a href="#fnr12" id="fn12">12</a></sup> The Jesus of history is limited by his humanity, culture, and history. This was his choice. But it was in this Jesus that the action of God—Parent, Son, and Spirit—becomes manifest. The Christ will reach fullness only on the last day when all things will be reconciled.</p>
<p class="indent">When we speak of the historical Jesus, distinguishing him from the Christ, we refer to the historical, not the risen Jesus. After the resurrection, Jesus becomes transhistorical or cosmic. He is no longer in time and in history. But we—the Church—experience this risen Jesus who lived and died in history in and through the memory that has been handed down to us—in the community of disciples, in the scriptures, and in other ways. Already the resurrection is a transhistorical event. This memory that we have of Jesus that leads us in faith to experience the mystery of his person is humanly, historically, and culturally limited and conditioned. It is in and through this historical memory that we experience Jesus. But at the same time we are aware that the risen Christ and his paschal mystery is present wherever God's saving grace is present. This presence does not obviously pass only through this particular historical memory that we celebrate. This is what we mean by saying that the Christ is more than Jesus. But to be complete, we must at once specify that here we are speaking of the Jesus of history, and not of the risen Jesus. We need not speculate about the precise nature of the risen humanity of Jesus, but we can talk about his humanity in history. That is why it will be helpful if we talk about the historical Jesus or the Jesus of history and not simply about Jesus or the humanity of the Word. Distinction between the historical and transhistorical stages of Jesus’ humanity does not mean separation. We do not mean to say that Jesus in history was a mere human person who becomes divine in his resurrection. We are, instead, before two manifestations of the same person. But the process that leads dynamically from the one to the other—the life, death, and resurrection of Jesus—is a real process and not just “play acting.” The risen humanity is what it is because of the historical life and death of Jesus. At the same time, however, the distinction between the historical and the risen manifestations of Jesus helps us to understand the specificity and limitations of the Church-community, whose tradition goes back to the memory of the historical Jesus. The paschal mystery itself is <a id="page_94"/>made present to the community in and through the symbol of the Last Supper. In the past, when we spoke of Jesus or of the Church as the sacrament, we referred to the <i>real</i> experience of God that they mediated. Now we should become aware that this mediation is primarily <i>symbolic</i>, though no less real, and refers directly to a historical memory in and through which we reach out to and experience the mystery. By not identifying the memory and the mystery, in whatever way we may understand the special connection between them we make space for other possible symbolic mediations. We know this is possible even within our own tradition—we may encounter Christ in the poor as much as in the eucharist, though not in the same way. The former encounter may be even more crucial to our Christian life.</p>
<p class="indent">When we speak of the theological universality of the Christ we have to take into account the whole cosmic breadth of the action of Christ and not limit it to its manifestation in the historical Jesus. It is true that we should not separate the two poles of the same person. But the relationship between the two will be discovered, not by universalizing the particularity of the historical Jesus but by setting it in the context of the universal action of the Word. The disciples intuit the divine dimension of the personality of Jesus precisely by realizing the universal significance of his salvific act in his death and resurrection. We can say that it is insofar as he is divine that the historical actions of Jesus acquire a universal significance.<sup><a href="#fnr13" id="fn13">13</a></sup> But this universal significance cannot be fully understood if we do not place it in the context of the universal action of the Word.<sup><a href="#fnr14" id="fn14">14</a></sup></p>
<p class="indent">This universal action of Christ cannot be localized in a point of time in history, because it will not be complete till the last day when Christ will be all in all. The universality of Christ, therefore, includes all God's manifestations in history. While we Christians see a special, even unique place and role in this history for God's action in Jesus we cannot simply universalize this.</p>
<p class="indent">Our perspective here will depend on how we see history in relation to eternity. Eternity is transcendentally contemporaneous with time. When we speak of the divine we cannot speak of before and after. It is <i>tota simul</i>—everything at the same time—as the scholastics used to say. Yet when the divine enters history this same divine action has to take place in history—in temporal succession. But when we speak we often confuse the two levels. At the divine/eternal level, the phrase “Christ saves” has universal resonance. The action transcends time, there is no before and after. And yet in time, at the human/historical level, there is a succession and a dynamic progression. The term “eschatological” sometimes indicates this with its dynamic of “already” and “not yet.” We cannot separate eternity and history. Yet eternity embraces and transcends history and must not be identified with one particular event however central it may be in the historical process. Correspondingly, history <i>concretizes</i> the eternal, without historically particularizing it.<sup><a href="#fnr15" id="fn15">15</a></sup></p>
<a id="page_95"/>
<p class="indent">This eternal versus historical dynamic is true of all divine actions, but is particularly so of God's action in Jesus. If we are not careful we will be talking in two registers in a confused manner. Thus talk about universality is meaningful at the divine/eternal level. When we talk about the Word/Christ we are talking at this level. This universal action of God in Christ is realized in time through a history—in a dynamic progession of actions that constitute a unified structure. These concrete actions have a universal significance and relevance as parts of this structure. But affirming this is different from universalizing the historical/particular, making it historically universal. To come back to our earlier formulation—Jesus is the Christ, but the Christ is more than Jesus. The mystery of Christ includes all the other manifestations of God in history. Therefore we cannot reduce it to its manifestation in the historical Jesus. Much of our talk about Jesus as Christ keeps on playing simultaneously on two registers about the strength of the unity of the personhood of Jesus Christ—eternal/historical, divine/human—without a clear differentiation. I am trying to point to the differentiation between the divine and the human/historical in that person and to the implications, not only for the way we speak, but also for the way we understand God's action in history.</p>
<p class="indent">Our faith affirmation—though it has its foundation in the historical—transcends history. Our encounter with other religions, for instance, is at the historical level of experience. But our theology of religions—while it takes account of this historical experience—is an affirmation of faith “from below,” and not “from above.” We can also look at the problem from a slightly different point of view. We often tend to talk at an objective, ontological level without taking into account the historical, personal level in which we live and act. It is not helpful to affirm the objective universality of Christ and draw a priori historical conclusions from it without trying to understand the concrete manner in which people actually reach salvation outside the Church which confesses faith in Jesus as the Christ.</p>
<p class="indent">A similar differentiation, to which we are accustomed, is between the economic and the immanent Trinity. The Triune God is identical, whether immanent or economic. But there is a story of God's manifestation in history through Word and Spirit that leads us to understand and articulate relationships within the Trinity. It would not always be helpful to speak simply of God or Trinity acting without differentiating the actual person involved in a particular manifestation. It is the Word that becomes flesh. It is the Spirit that descends on Jesus at his baptism in the Jordan.</p>
<p class="indent">Starting from this articulation of the economic Trinity, many theologians speak about the differentiation between the manifestations of God in Christ and in the Spirit and see in this differentiation the possibility of understanding the universality of the mystery of Christ. Christ is universal because the Spirit is universal.<sup><a href="#fnr16" id="fn16">16</a></sup> He is present and active everywhere even when Christ is not acknowledged. Some would even speak of the “absence” of Jesus in the economy of the Holy Spirit.<sup><a href="#fnr17" id="fn17">17</a></sup> Some, saying that the Spirit is <a id="page_96"/>the Spirit of Jesus Christ, seek to reduce the action of the Spirit to that of Jesus Christ. It is the risen Christ that sends the Spirit. The link is certainly there. But the Spirit is not Jesus Christ. Its mediations are real and need not lead to faith in Jesus Christ in the context of history. Here we have another opening to other religions from a Christian perspective. While this articulation between Christ and the Spirit is valid and instructive, I have chosen in this paper to focus on the articulations in the person of Jesus Christ himself.</p>
<p class="indent">How do we see God's action in Jesus? The image that seems most helpful to understand the event of Jesus is the biblical one of the covenant. For a Christian what is special about Jesus is that in his paschal mystery has been manifested God's loving self-communication to all peoples. The passion and death of Jesus show that this relationship is not something natural, automatic or physical, simply because Jesus is God-human, but a human transformation that everyone has to undergo in freedom through dying and rising. In raising Jesus to new life God has made a commitment to—an enduring covenant with—humanity. This does not mean that the other manifestations of God in history become useless. They lead people—in their respective cultures—to their personal commitments. As in marriage the formal, public commitment does not take away the value of, but valorizes the expressions and communications of love both before and after the formal covenant, God's covenant in Jesus valorizes all his other manifestations. The covenant in Jesus has a cosmic significance precisely because of the divine (Christ) in him. The whole of salvation history is held together by the cosmic aspect of the mystery.<sup><a href="#fnr18" id="fn18">18</a></sup></p>
<p class="indent">Sometimes we speak of Christ as the final Word, as the norm by which to judge everything else. There is certainly truth in this claim. But the question is which Christ we are talking about. It is true only if we think of the divine aspect of Christ. The Word is the norm. On the last day Christ will be the pleroma, the fullness. But the historical Jesus is Christ's kenotic form. Jesus promises to send the Spirit who will lead his disciples into all truth (see John 16:13). The fullness of Christ is in the future when God will gather together in him all the riches that he has communicated to the world. Therefore such statements must be understood, not historically, but eschatologically—in a dialectic of already/not yet. Only such a vision will enable us to understand that, in a real sense, Jesus <i>becomes the Christ in fullness in the process of salvation history</i>, and thus it is also our task to promote this becoming through mission and dialogue.</p>
<p class="indent">The church is the witness and the servant of the mystery. It lives the mystery through the memory of the tradition it has received from its manifestation in the history of Jesus. But it should also be sensitive to other manifestations of Mystery in the history of humanity. Its mission is to proclaim and promote the mystery of the kingdom in its fullness and not itself. The Church's preferred manner of mediating this message must be, following Jesus, <i>kenotic</i>.</p>
<a id="page_97"/>
<p class="subhead1"><b>A S<small>ERVANT</small> C<small>HURCH</small></b></p>
<p class="indent">Part of the problem that we face when we discuss questions concerning the universality of Christ is the image of the Church with which we operate. The church is a visible institution with a creed, rituals, and organization. In this sense we can see it as one religion among others. But sometimes we also think of the Church as a mystery, the Mystical Body of Christ, that includes all who are saved. Whatever be the justification of such language, it is not helpful to think of the Church in this manner in the context of other religions and of history. If we consider the Church as a religion, then we cannot attribute to it the uniqueness and universality that we attribute to Christ. While people attain to salvation outside the Church, the Church itself is a pilgrim, limited by culture and history.<sup><a href="#fnr19" id="fn19">19</a></sup> It confesses Christ who is the Truth. But it does not possess him and its own understanding of him is limited by the historical memory it has received. The gospels speak to us about Jesus, but do not claim to offer an adequate expression of him despite their multiple attempts.</p>
<p class="indent">We often have an image of salvation history as the growth of the Church till the whole world becomes the Church. I do not know where this image comes from. The Bible rather speaks of the remnant, a community that is persecuted which looks forward in hope for the Lord's coming.<sup><a href="#fnr20" id="fn20">20</a></sup> I think that the image of the Church as the servant, proclaiming the mystery of the Reign of God, ready to offer its life as witness, may be more authentic than the one of a triumphalistic army conquering all before it. Its service is precisely that of helping the unification of all humankind by promoting a human community of dialogue and collaboration. Its task is to proclaim Jesus and his mystery, more in action than in words, so that others too are challenged by him and turn to God—“converted.” Some may be called to join the community of his disciples. Others may undergo real change while remaining in their own religions. The concrete way in which the transformation and unification will take place is a mystery that is known to God alone. All we can do is to be faithful witnesses in action, not only to the mystery of God's love, but to its self-sacrificing manifestation in Jesus.</p>
<p class="indent">A person, ideally, ought to become a member of the Church not merely to be saved, but because the believer feels called to participate in the mission of the disciples of Jesus. It is a call to a service, a particular role in history—not an honor or a reason to feel superior. One is not saved “more” or “quicker” because one is Christian. The measure of salvation is the freedom and generosity of God. We may recall the parable of the workers sent to the vineyard at various hours of the day (Mt. 20:1–15).</p>
<p class="subhead1"><b>A V<small>ISION OF</small> H<small>ISTORY</small></b></p>
<p class="indent">One traditional view of salvation history sees it as a progressive narrowing down from creation to the Mosaic covenant to Jesus after whom it <a id="page_98"/>opens up again through the growth of the church. It is a linear view of history, stressing the discontinuity between nature and grace, and between before and after Christ—and envisages other religions as distinct from the divinely authorized history of salvation. This vision is narrow and unsatisfactory. It does not take into account the fact that God is the Father and Mother of all. God's election of a people or of a person is not exclusive, but sacramental and symbolic. The cosmic activity of the Word and the Spirit are affirmed by the Old and the New Testaments precisely on the basis of the particular experiences of God's saving action in a person's or people's life.</p>
<p class="indent">An alternate vision affirms a saving plan of God that embraces the whole world and all peoples. It is not cosmic in the sense that it is simply identified with nature and history but because it includes the whole cosmos and history, while taking into account the key element in history—human freedom. It is an interplay between the freedoms of God and of human persons, between call and response. In a sense it is very personal. But it is also communitarian. Election, representation, solidarity, and mission are creative and structural elements of this history. The covenants between God and the human person are played out in the context of cultures and traditions. Both freedom (of God and of the human person) and cultures are factors of pluralism. But this pluralism is integrated within the one plan that God has for the world. The unity of the plan of God is a unity of relationships, neither of identity nor of simple plurality. Relationship implies a plurality of roles and functions within a totality.</p>
<p class="indent">A role that one may be called to play in a community is a service; it is not a personal title for honor. In the community itself, a role is ordained to the functioning and the building up of the community; one is not superior to or better than another—all are necessary. From a rational perspective we cannot think of relationships except in terms of a structure whose elements are somehow related as more or less, as superior or inferior. We are accustomed to think that priests are superior to the people or that religious are following a more perfect way of life. We used to think that “objectively” virginity was superior to marriage. Today we are struggling to overcome such stereotypes. To a person who is married, marriage is the best way of life. Priesthood is a role of service in the church, just as the lay people have their role. In the religious sphere the model for pluralism is the Trinity, which is a totality of relationships and not a structure of more or less. The ideal of the Church as a communion of persons and communities is also struggling against older hierarchical or structural models.</p>
<p class="indent">God's plan for the world is a network of relationships. We are aware of how God has been manifested to us and what mission God has given us in the world. We are not aware of how God may have been manifested to the others. Nor do we comprehend, much less do we dominate, the plan of God for the world. What Christians can do in this situation is to affirm and live their own identity, witness it in word and deed, and enter into a relationship <a id="page_99"/>of dialogue with others. It is in listening to others and in discerning together that we may progressively discover the plan of God as it unfolds in the course of history.</p>
<p class="indent">In faith we Christians affirm that God's saving action reaches out to all peoples in ways unknown to us. We confess in Jesus, the Christ, the universal savior. We experience in our dialogue with others that God has also been active in them. We look forward to the transformation and unification of all things in heaven and on earth when God will be all in all (1 Cor. 15:28). With this hope we enter into relationships to contribute to the building of a new heaven and a new earth. Dialogue is the manner in which we witness to what has been revealed to us of Mystery while we respect the ineffable transcendence of Mystery.</p>
<p class="subhead"><b>THE SIGNIFICANCE OF CHRIST</b></p>
<p class="indent">In the light of our reflections above, the profound meaning of affirming that the Christ is the universal savior is that God is really the savior of all peoples. He is not the God of a particular people. God's action is not limited to a particular historical and cultural tradition. Christ has broken down such walls that divide. Once we have recognized Christ in Jesus, we see with the New Testament, particularly with John and Paul, that Christ and his Spirit are active everywhere. Our task is not to carry Christ where he is not present, but rather to discover him where he is, sometimes in mysterious ways unknown to us. The process of this quest is not a material-scientific study of culture and history, but a listening in dialogue to the people in whom we perceive the salvific dialogue between God and the human person taking place. As we listen to the experience of others, it is also our privilege to actively witness to our own experience of the mystery of Christ in Jesus and its relevance to the contemporary world. We feel that we are sent as witnesses on a mission. However we must not be astonished to find that others, too, may claim such a mission.</p>
<p class="indent">We must resist the temptation to reduce the universality of Christ to the universality of the visible, institutional Church. We witness to a mystery with which we cannot simply identify ourselves. We often speak about the link that the Church has with the Reign of God. We do not often reflect on the distance that separates the Church from the Reign. One reason is that we tend to think too juridically in terms of power and representation, and not in terms of freedom and relationship—that is, in personal terms. It would be helpful to reread in this context St. Paul's reflection on the Jews in relation to the mystery of salvation (Rom. 10–11). One could say that the limitations of the Church in culture and history make place for the other religions in the plan of God for the world—just as the going away of Jesus seems to make place for the Spirit in history in the reflection of John (John 16:7).</p>
<p class="indent">I spoke in the beginning of three paradigms in contemporary theology <a id="page_100"/>of religions—namely exclusivism, inclusivism and pluralism. The paradigm I am trying to evolve will find a place between inclusivism and pluralism. It is inclusivist insofar as it reflects in the perspective of the Christian faith in the mysteries of the Trinity and of the Incarnation and their ongoing action in history. But because of the differentiations I have made between the Word and the Spirit, between the Jesus of history and Christ, and between Christ and the Church, the inclusion is only at the level of the mystery of God and Christ whose universality we affirm in faith. It is pluralist, not merely at a historical, phenomenological level of the religions, but also at the level of the plural manifestations of God in history, through the Word eternal and also incarnate and through the Spirit. Therefore the pluralism is already at the level of religion as experience. In faith I affirm that this pluralism is structured into a unity. All believers, because they believe that God is one, will have to affirm this. But this unity is eschatological, and both the concrete shape and the actual realization of this unity transcend history.</p>
<p class="indent">I would like to present this as an <i>advaitic</i> perspective that seeks a mediation between the one and the many, not denying either, but making them the poles of one complex reality.</p>
<p class="indent">The goal of mission is to make our own contribution to the realization of the plan of God for the world. This requires listening to the others, reading the signs of the times, building up community, promoting freedom, fellowship and justice and witnessing to the hope that is in us (1 Peter 3:15). To proclaim the universal salvific will of God in Christ means not just to talk about it, but to make it happen. We must also proclaim—realize—the Good News of Jesus. This means that it is not enough to talk in general about the values of the Reign, about justice and development, and about peace and freedom. Jesus was involved with the life of the poor. He particularly opted for the poor and the oppressed. He chose the way of the cross, of total self-giving, even unto death. He sought solidarity with people, particularly in suffering. He lived the reality of communion symbolized in the sharing of food as his own very being. It is significant that this aspect of the suffering Christ, who identifies himself with suffering humanity, seems to attract people like Gandhi and many Indian artists who are the pioneers of Christian art in India, though they do not belong to the Church.<sup><a href="#fnr21" id="fn21">21</a></sup> To narrow down such a broad and rich mission to increasing membership in the church seems a pity. Even such “conversion” is God's work, not ours. A Church open to the world and to God's mystery will have open frontiers and be less worried about its identity and propagation than about the Reign of God.</p>
<p class="subhead"><b>CONCLUSION</b></p>
<p class="indent">People are afraid that to affirm pluralism is somehow to fall into relativism—that is, to see all religions as the same and to condone pure relativism. <a id="page_101"/>If we look at pluralism not in the abstract or in material terms but in personal terms of freedom and relationship, then we will see its richness on the one hand and on the other the need to affirm and witness to one's own identity. I am happy to be a Christian. God has called me to be one. I have discovered the mystery of God's universal salvific will in Christ through Jesus. Jesus has shown me the way to promote this mystery in the world in the particular way of being on the side of the poor, ready to give and to share even unto death. I proclaim this message as more than ever relevant to today's world. But I also respect the mystery of God's free relationship with other free human beings. Other religions do not exist apart from other believers. I respect pluralism as the manifestation of the freedom and personhood of God and of the others. I am not anxious to somehow structure them into a system. As a matter of fact, at the level of religions as institutions, pluralism often becomes a problem.</p>
<p class="indent">Respect should find expression in various ways according to the context. If I am simply a member of a multireligious community, I can be satisfied with dialogue and witness. But if I run a hospital, just as I would claim the right for the Christians to be ministered to by their chaplain, I should at least be open to allow others the appropriate means to find support in their own religions in a critical period of their lives. Similarly, if I manage a school, I have a responsibility to provide every one an opportunity for an integral education. The school is not merely, or even primarily, a religious institution; it is a service to the community. One may see it as a good occasion to witness to one's faith and to contribute to the building up of the Reign, but one has also a responsibility to see to the faith education of the members of other religions, especially if reflecting on their faith can have a purifying and prophetic effect for them. This responsibility seems even more obvious and acceptable if we properly understand the universal saving act of God in Christ.</p>
<p class="subhead"><b>NOTES</b></p>
<p class="noteitem"><a href="#fn1" id="fnr1">1</a>. See M. Amaladoss, S.J., “Theological Bases for Religious Pluralism,” in S. Arulsamy, ed., <i>Communalism in India</i> (Bangalore: Claretian Publications, 1988), pp. 115-138.</p>
<p class="noteitem"><a href="#fn2" id="fnr2">2</a>. See Paul F. Knitter, <i>No Other Name?</i> (Maryknoll, N.Y.: Orbis Books, 1985; and London: SCM Press, 1985); Alan Race, <i>Christians and Religious Pluralism</i> (Maryknoll, N.Y.: Orbis Books, 1982; and London: SCM Press, 1983); Gavin D'Costa, <i>Theology and Religious Pluralism</i> (Oxford: Basil Blackwell, 1986).</p>
<p class="noteitem"><a href="#fn3" id="fnr3">3</a>. See, for instance, the use of the term “myth” in two books that John Hick has edited: <i>The Myth of God Incarnate</i> (London: SCM, 1977); with Paul F. Knitter, <i>The Myth of Christian Uniqueness</i> (Maryknoll, N.Y.: Orbis Books, 1987; and London: SCM Press, 1988). It is true that the word “myth” may be used to mean a symbol that affirms a deeper truth. Yet for Christians God Incarnate is not a “myth” in the same way as the creation narratives in the Book of Genesis.</p>
<p class="noteitem"><a href="#fn4" id="fnr4">4</a>. See Leonard Swidler, ed., <i>Toward a Universal Theology of Religion</i> (Maryknoll, <a id="page_102"/>N.Y.: Orbis, 1987), especially the strong critique of the idea of rationalist approaches by R. Panikkar, pp. 118-153. See also Wilfred Cantwell Smith, <i>Towards a World Theology</i> (Maryknoll, N.Y.: Orbis Books, 1990; and London: Macmillan, 1990).</p>
<p class="noteitem"><a href="#fn5" id="fnr5">5</a>. I use the word “witness” not in a passive sense as weaker than proclamation, but in the full biblical sense of “martyrion.”</p>
<p class="noteitem"><a href="#fn6" id="fnr6">6</a>. In the context of dialogue with Buddhism, it may be problematic to speak constantly about God as I am doing in this paper. Nevertheless, I speak in a Christian context to Christians and so I use a Christian language.</p>
<p class="noteitem"><a href="#fn7" id="fnr7">7</a>. See M. Amaladoss, <i>Education in the Faith in a Multi-Religious Context</i> (New Delhi: Jesuit Educational Association, 1988), pp. 3-4.</p>
<p class="noteitem"><a href="#fn8" id="fnr8">8</a>. See A. Pieris, “The Buddha and the Christ: Mediators of Liberation,” in Hick and Knitter, <i>The Myth of Christian Uniqueness</i>, p. 162.</p>
<p class="noteitem"><a href="#fn9" id="fnr9">9</a>. See R. Panikkar, “The Jordan, the Tiber and the Ganges,” in Hick and Knitter, <i>The Myth of Christian Uniqueness</i>, p. 104.</p>
<p class="noteitem1"><a href="#fn10" id="fnr10">10</a>. This occurs through the action of the Word (Wisdom) and the Spirit. See John Paul II, <i>Redemptor Hominis</i> 6, 11; and <i>Dominum et Vivificantem</i>, 53. See also <i>Ad Gentes</i>, 4 and <i>Gaudium et Spes</i>, 22.</p>
<p class="noteitem1"><a href="#fn11" id="fnr11">11</a>. In the middle ages, St. Thomas Aquinas held that even non-Christians were justified at the time of their first moral judgment, if they chose the “Good.” Cf. <i>Summa Theologiae</i> I-II, q. 89, a. 6.</p>
<p class="noteitem1"><a href="#fn12" id="fnr12">12</a>. Cf. R. Panikkar, “Un presente senza catture,” <i>Rocca</i> (October 1, 1987): 54-59. See also Panikkar's “The Jordan, the Tiber, and the Ganges,” in <i>The Myth of Christian Uniqueness</i>, pp. 89-116; Edward Schillebeeckx, <i>Jesus in Our Western Culture</i> (London: SCM, 1987), pp. 2-3; Christian Duquoc, “Appartenance ecclésiale et identification chrétienne,” <i>Concilium</i> 216 (1988): 141-152. The words of Jacques Dupuis are also suggestive: “It is true to say that, while Jesus is the Christ, the Christ is more than Jesus. To deny this would amount to denying the real transformation, emphatically affirmed by the entire New Testament, of Jesus’ manhood as he is raised by the Father. The meta-historical Christ, or cosmic Christ is universally present and active in human history.” This citation is taken from Dupuis’ unpublished manuscript “Theology of Religions, Christian or Universal.” A similar distinction between the two poles in the personality of Jesus is made by K. Rahner in <i>Foundations of the Christian Faith</i> (New York: Seabury, 1978), p. 290; and by Wilhem Thusing, in W. Thusing and K. Rahner, <i>A New Christology</i> (New York: Crossroad, 1980; and London: Burns and Oates, 1980), p. 180. C. Duquoc in A. Ngindu Mushete, ed., <i>Bulletin de Théologie Africaine</i> (1985), p. 294, underlines the necessity “maintenir un écart, non une opposition, entre Jesus et Christ, Christ est le nom de l'ouverture universelle de Jesus, Christ donne l'Esprit au Père. Jesus est celui qui a designé dans une particularité jamais absolutise cette ouverture.”</p>
<p class="noteitem1"><a href="#fn13" id="fnr13">13</a>. See Gerald O'Collins, <i>Interpreting Jesus</i> (Mahwah, N.J.: Paulist Press, 1983; and London: Geoffrey Chapman, 1983), p. 167: “If it was Jesus’ humanity that made his dying and rising possible, it was his divinity that gave that dying and rising a cosmic value.”</p>
<p class="noteitem1"><a href="#fn14" id="fnr14">14</a>. See Walter Kasper, <i>Jesus the Christ</i> (London: Burns and Oates, 1976), pp. 188-189.</p>
<p class="noteitem1"><a href="#fn15" id="fnr15">15</a>. See the reflection of R. Panikkar on the difference between the “concrete” and the “particular” and the “universal” and the “general” in “The Jordan,” in Hick and Knitter, <i>Myth of Christian Uniqueness</i>, p. 107.</p>
<a id="page_103"/>
<p class="noteitem1"><a href="#fn16" id="fnr16">16</a>. See John O'Donnell, “In Him and Over Him: The Holy Spirit in the Life of Jesus,” <i>Gregorianum</i> 70 (1989): 24-45: “Pneumatology offers us the key to grasp the universality of God's saving purposes without dissolving the uniqueness of the Incarnation” (p. 45).</p>
<p class="noteitem1"><a href="#fn17" id="fnr17">17</a>. See John 16:5-15. K. Rahner in <i>Theological Investigations</i>, vol. 17 (New York: Crossroad, 1981), p. 43, says: “Christ is present and efficacious in the non-Christian believer (and therefore in the non-Christian religions) through his Spirit.” Walter Kasper in <i>Jesus the Christ</i> says something similar: “The Spirit who is operative in Christ in his fullness, is at work in varying degrees everywhere in the history of mankind” (p. 268). Cf. also C. Duquoc, “Christianity and Its Claim to Universality,” <i>Concilium</i> 135 (1986): 64.</p>
<p class="noteitem1"><a href="#fn18" id="fnr18">18</a>. See O'Collins, <i>Interpreting Jesus</i>, p. 167.</p>
<p class="noteitem1"><a href="#fn19" id="fnr19">19</a>. Cf. Duquoc, <i>Provisional Churches</i> (Philadephia: Trinity Press, Int., 1983; and London: SCM, 1986).</p>
<p class="noteitem1"><a href="#fn20" id="fnr20">20</a>. Cf. Mt. 10:16-25 and parallels; John 15:18-21. K. Rahner speaks of the “Church of the Little Flock” in <i>The Shape of the Church to Come</i> (London: SPCK, 1974).</p>
<p class="noteitem1"><a href="#fn21" id="fnr21">21</a>. Cf. Matthew Lederle, <i>Christian Painting in India</i> (Bombay: Heras Institute, 1987), pp. 65-66.</p>
</div>
</body>
</html>