<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>chapter12</title>
<link href="ebook_style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
<meta content="urn:uuid:e628635c-8169-4333-a0b2-b0f205aae46e" name="Adept.expected.resource"/>
</head>
<body>
<div>
<a id="page_189"/>
<h2 class="chapternumber">12</h2>
<h2 class="chaptertitle"><big>T</big>he <big>H</big>ope of <big>L</big>iberation <big>L</big>essens <big>M</big>an's <big>I</big>nhumanity: <big>A</big> <big>C</big>ontribution to <big>D</big>ialogue at <big>V</big>illage <big>L</big>evel</h2>
<p class="chapterauthor1">MICHAEL RODRIGO</p>
<p class="epigraph1"><i>When old words die out on the tongue, new melodies break forth from the heart: and where the old tracks are lost, new country is revealed with its wonders</i>.</p>
<p class="epigraph-right1">—Rabindranath Tagore, in <i>Gitanjali</i>, 37</p>
<p class="indent">To the Buddhist peasant of Uva-Wellassa in Sri Lanka, who for over a century bore the brunt of British colonialism from which he has never fully recovered nor ever will; to the Catholic seminary professor who after twenty years of Christian theology, ways of worship and philosophy suddenly went over to a contextual seminary program under a dynamic bishop; to two Salvatorian religious sisters who, trained in Rome, branched out, one to village health, the other into teaching theology and surveying village reality, the inner call, heard differently but firmly, must have been the same. The three Christians will say in faith that it is the imperious yet reassuring call of the Risen Christ hidden among the people, especially in the countryside (“I'll go before you into Galilee”). The peasant has already said with his life that he and his <i>embula</i>-carrying wife felt an urge to better the situation of all his people, and so, felt they had to be with those “who came to be with them.”<sup><a href="#fnr1" id="fn1">1</a></sup></p>
<p class="subhead"><b>THE PRESENCE WITH THE PEOPLE</b></p>
<p class="indent">Accordingly, we—a Buddhist young man of thirty called Somadasa and I—came to an <i>illuk</i>-infested (<i>imperata cylindrica</i>), two-acre block. 140 miles <a id="page_190"/>east of Sri Lanka's capital city of Colombo, to an area in which <i>puranagam</i> (traditional villages) eked out an existence side by side with new colonizations by natural groups, mostly of Sinhala Buddhist peasants who formed over 95% of the people of the area. It was on July 11, 1980, the Feast of St. Benedict. The two Salvatorian sisters came on the 13th of June, the Feast of St. Anthony, 1931. Within a fortnight, a Buddhist monk asked us when we would be leaving the palace, for he thought for sure that we would be soon baptizing the people. A small-time businessman who detested us when we picked a few unlettered boys to teach them their own language, Sinhala, abused us in public, saying: “Why mix up religions? You see to your own religion; we'll see to ours.” In 1982, after a particularly trying drought in this Dry Zone area of Sri Lanka, when we had listed 89 farmers for drought relief in a twenty-page report on how they incurred the losses and to what extent, the monks joined us and went for redress to the state officials. A puny official—the only one available at the time—refused to pay any drought relief. The peasant farmers, the monks and the two sisters and priest turned back, but by evening the local Member of Parliament had been informed that “two religious groups had got together for redress for the farmers,” and on the morrow, the Buddhist monk of Alutwela visited us and said: “We must continue to work together for the rights of man. For whom did the Buddha work? For man. What did your founder, Christ, do? He lived and died for man. I was challenged yesterday by a state official because I went with you and the two sisters for drought relief.”<sup><a href="#fnr2" id="fn2">2</a></sup> We felt “together” in our distress. We hold, therefore, that there are not two histories but only one history of man's distress and of his salvation—liberation. Christians, within the Judeo-Christian tradition, believe that God, El-Shaddai, the Transcendent, became El Imanu (Emmanuel), the God who is <i>With</i> us. His power passed into people and the people became sovereign. Biblical covenantal language ever signifies: “I am in you and you are in Me,” for God says through patriarch and prophet: “I will be your God and you will be my people” (Exodus 19: Jeremiah 31:31).</p>
<p class="indent">Then also the right composition of the Gospel according to Matthew, practically begins and ends with the word with, “They found the child <i>with</i> Mary his mother” (Mt. 1:23) and again: “Behold I am <i>with</i> you all days,” (Matt. 28:19). But in the story of the anointing of Jesus’ feet, the same word is used for the poor: “The poor you will always have <i>with</i> you.” Some people brandish this text and flee responsibility for the poor by merely repeating these lines: “Christ said they will always be with us.” But the story is quite other: Judas who held the purse strings did not care for the poor. Christ the poor Man defended Mary's action by quoting a text from the Book of Deuteronomy (15:11) which says: “The needy will never be lacking in the land. This is why I command you to open your hand to your brother, to him who is humiliated and poor in your land.” The very text some take as argument against the poor is really an indictment of their reluctance to discover, and come to the aid of, the poor. It is our contention <a id="page_191"/>that our being present to the poor peasant here is also our being present to the Christ who identifies himself in some secret way with the poor.</p>
<p class="indent">We began this chapter with the Lord's call, and hence we feel it opportune to say that there is a subtle temptation to pride if we feel we are the only group “making the grade” and discerning Christ in the poor. It is easy to try to live like the poor and wag a finger at everyone else as the low grovelling lot, but that would be sinful, non-liberative and so unlike the real poor. It is he who calls. His is a humble, healing presence. He chooses whomsoever he wants to discover his varied presence: he is present in the assembly at the holy Eucharist; present in the minister, in the word proclaimed, present in the Sacrament reserved. The <i>Priestly Formation</i> decree, n.8 suggests that “the young cleric be taught to look for Christ in meditation, in the Eucharistic celebration, in the bishop who sends him, in his people, <i>and in the unbeliever</i>.” If all our life is an attempt to find his traces, his presence, in faith, then it is a humble task, not one that should fill us with pride.</p>
<p class="indent">Our desire is, however, to be more intensely branches in the Vine, so that our presence will show forth the Jesus praxis, our spirituality will be a following of Jesus who did not baptize but was baptized in his culture and proclaimed his suffering and death as the baptism of his preference: “I have a baptism which I must still receive and how great is my distress till it is over” (Lk 12:49-50). He said so to induce us all to a baptism, an illumination or enlightenment (what the Greeks call a <i>photismos</i>). Is it not into such a baptism that the suffering masses of rural Asia and the city-state broken-downs have been plunged? Does not this kind of baptism bring forth a peaceful, patient, long-suffering people whose life is often short-lived by the violent banding together of financially high, powerful leaders of elitist groups, and yet whose life is lived in newness and constant hope of betterment, collective and personal, arisen in their hearts?</p>
<p class="indent">The mystical union signified by the Vine and branches image is not laid aside when we say that Jesus is Word of God as doing-word, the Verb of God (<i>dabar</i> in Aramaic). It is the source of orthodoxy and orthopraxis, of Christian saying and doing, of promise and fulfillment. Our presence must speak to all, as an eloquent presence, to point to the eternal Word, just as the presence, word and activity of the Buddhist must deepen our belief and theirs in the <i>sanatana dhamma</i>, the eternal <i>dhamma</i> word, the firm word (<i>Dharma = firmus = firm</i>) of stability. Both groups wanting the fulfillment of an undying or a beyond-death truth (<i>satya</i>) is our exchange, our dialogy more than our theology.<sup><a href="#fnr3" id="fn3">3</a></sup></p>
<p class="subhead1"><b>D<small>IALOGICAL</small> T<small>HEOLOGY OR</small> D<small>IALOGY</small></b></p>
<p class="indent">Out of the turbulence of the mid-sixties, dialogue came forth. Much under the influence of Bonhoeffer's theology, and worried about what the expected decline of traditional religion might do to the relevance of Christianity, <a id="page_192"/>Harvey Cox wrote <i>Secular City</i>, underlining the tirades of the prophets against mere cult, and Jesus’ opposition to the priestly establishment of his own time.</p>
<p class="indent">Twenty years later, in 1984, the same author wrote <i>Religion in the Secular City</i>, underscoring religion as irrepressible. In no way rendering obsolete the earlier work, it furthers biblical faith as critical of all human religiousness. <i>Jesus was a subverter of evil</i>. He was and is seen as a dangerous threat to the bogus pseudo-peace, disorder and injustice that often passes for law and order, peace and national security.</p>
<p class="indent">The author introduces a study made by Carl Raschke, which outlines four ways in which students approach the truth question in religion. We need to outline the four ways here to see how Cox's own way may indicate future trends and even confirm our own.</p>
<p class="indent">1. A <i>judgment-less</i> approach about the validity of their truth; a sympathetic study of various expressions of faith; a watching without evaluating. But Cox suggests that the question Is it true? always arises as a matter of life and death.</p>
<p class="indent">2. Study the <i>faith in human</i>. It is not a question of comparing systems in dialogue, but of human beings within these systems. Here too, the question of truth is not answered, for one must ask: “What faith will guide my choice?” if the truth-question is personally posited after the description of the religions.</p>
<p class="indent">3. A single tradition lies behind various expressions of faith. All religions are variants of a larger whole: a <i>unity-behind-diversity approach</i>. Raschke calls it the Hindu solution. Cox suggests that while it can be true, it is not demonstrably true.</p>
<p class="indent">4. Panikkar's approach. One neither hides the differences nor trumpets the similarities but one has <i>awe and ecstasy</i>—a waiting and listening, a non-aggressive approach like Gandhi's <i>ahimsa</i>.</p>
<p class="indent">But perhaps it is in Raschke's suggestions and Cox's confirmation of a fifth way that truth indicators may be found. Raschke wishes to go “beyond theology,” calling it “dialogy.” Cox rightly refuses mere terms and asks: “By dialogy, does Raschke mean something close to what I am calling ‘post modern’ theology?”<sup><a href="#fnr4" id="fn4">4</a></sup></p>
<p class="indent">Religion is perhaps the only institution that has an inbuilt critique of itself and of society, but history has always shown that it has notoriously lent itself almost always to a defence of the status quo, thus blunting the liberative edge it has. It is very likely that Raschke castigates as theology what he thinks to be a monolith, but if theology is theologizing or “doing theology,” and not the graven-in-stone image he seems to have, then it can also mean dialogy.</p>
<p class="indent">Cox repeats what we feel today to be the basic <i>locus theologicus</i>, namely, the poor on the march to freedom from all evil. In a first instance, the author says: “Christians meet their fellow human beings of the other great religious traditions, not in a detached or aggressive way but with a willingness <a id="page_193"/>to listen together to what the ancient runes say. It is important that this mutual listening take place not in some demarcated religious sphere but in the day-to-day combat and compromise of real life. The inner logic of the strictly academic approach to religious pluralism is leading it out of the academy and into the grimy world in which both fundamentalism and liberation theology are also trying to cope with the same cacophony.”<sup><a href="#fnr5" id="fn5">5</a></sup></p>
<p class="indent">And soon. Cox repeats with emphasis, concluding his twentieth chapter, that the poor are systematically excluded in the inter-religious dialogue, that the favored format dialogue today “is one in which representatives of the various religions of the world—usually scholars or ecclesiastical leaders whose positions make them more attuned to confessional rather than class differences—meet and converse about what unites or separates them. But it is the hard reality of social conflict not the exchange of ideas that creates unity or foments division. Christians who have participated with Hindus and humanists and others in actual conflict against the powers that be ‘do theology’ in a different way. They do it as part of an emerging world-wide community made up of the despised and rejected of the modern world and their allies. In this new community, as in those tiny, first-century congregations of ex-slaves and day-workers in Colossae and Ephesus, where they had also begun to hear the same good news, the most intransigent of religious, traditional and cultural barriers no longer have the power to divide.”<sup><a href="#fnr6" id="fn6">6</a></sup></p>
<p class="indent">Thus, if dialogue can gently and determinedly induce both parties, both religious groups (and in multi-religious dialogue areas), or all groups, to be prophetic at the service of the poor of God, by socio-political cooperation, then religion and dialogy would have done their obvious duty. Otherwise, dialogue will become only a frustrating task of aimlessly looking at each other and not transforming the world by the richness of a transforming presence.</p>
<p class="subhead"><b>GIVING WITNESS TO THE LIBERATIVE WORD</b></p>
<p class="indent">The Asian situation demands a clear-cut vision of a just society and of a new humanity which it purports to achieve. If development is truly <i>de-envelopment</i>, the removing of the envelope of bonds, then true development and liberation coincide in the release of the broken, and in transformation, not in mere reform of the oppressive and exploitative economic, social, political, cultural structures into a new society.</p>
<p class="indent">Then respect for human dignity becomes the creating of a society based on people's needs. If we are committed to them, involved with them and among them, rather than working for them, the very process of decision-making with them will become a transforming presence. We—the Jesus community—will not be mere catalysts, for in the process of a mutual presence, the people and we will be “doing the truth in love,” and that transforms us both, when people become the architects of their own destiny.</p>
<p class="indent">The transforming presence of the Word in the world is the basis of our <a id="page_194"/>transforming presence among the people. The latter presence demands witness or confessing to its truth. To confess is to give witness to, to profess, to proclaim by life-witness: <i>Fiteor, prophetare</i>, being allied words. It also signifies today prophesying, correcting, rectifying, conscientizing, denouncing of evil and announcing of good.</p>
<p class="indent">The <i>logos</i> or word inherent in dialogy is accepted by us Christians as Jesus. In our process of dialogue, we hold this principle: the more Christians present in a Buddhist milieu learn of the Buddha praxis and of the depth-values of Buddhism's holiness (called <i>sara dharma</i>) operative among the Buddhists, the more they will come to a better understanding of their own faith in God, in Jesus, in the Jesus praxis, faith in men and women who reveal in their own way one single aim for all humanity, and that is total release from every type of bondage unto freedom.</p>
<p class="subhead1"><b>T<small>HREE</small> M<small>OMENTS OF</small> C<small>ONFESSING</small></b></p>
<p class="indent">We therefore present three moments or aspects, rather than phases, in our witness to the total Christ:</p>
<p class="indent">i. Confessing Jesus in a Christian context</p>
<p class="indent">ii. Confessing the Buddha-Dhamma in a Buddhist context</p>
<p class="indent">iii Confessing Jesus in a Buddhist context.</p>
<p class="body-text3"><b><i>Confessing Jesus in a Christian context</i></b></p>
<p class="indent">We cannot proclaim Jesus today in the same old way. We must find new ways of living Him out in our life. And that will be a proclamation. The Christian context is accepted as the God-milieu; that is, Jesus is Word of the Father, Son of the Father, who opted for humankind, especially for the poor. Jesus never worked for himself but for the ongoing reign of God, the Kingdom. “The Bible and especially the New Testament presents Christ's work as one of liberation. God himself in the fullness of time sent his Incarnate Son into the world to free men from every form of slavery to which they were subject by reason of sin and of human egoism, from ignorance, destitution, hunger, oppression, hatred, injustice (Gal 4:4-5). Jesus’ first preaching was to proclaim the liberation of the oppressed. Sin, the root of all injustice and oppression is in fact an egoistic turning back upon ourselves, a refusal to love God and others and therefore to love God himself. In continuing the prophetic mission of her founder, the Church must more forcefully preach and realize more effectively this liberation of the poor, the outcast and the worker working with others, building with others a world where every man, no matter what his race, religion or nationality can live a fully human life, freed from servitude imposed on him by other men or by natural forces over which he has not enough control.”<sup><a href="#fnr7" id="fn7">7</a></sup></p>
<p class="indent">Jesus made a preferential option for the poor. Crowds (the <i>ochlos</i>) followed him, for they felt they were sheep without a shepherd. He loved them with compassion welling from his heart. The Greek verb <i>splagchnizomai</i> <a id="page_195"/>is from the noun <i>splachnon</i>, which means intestines, bowels, entrails or heart, those inward parts from which strong emotions arise, a “gut reaction,” when Jesus was moved to pity. Those who follow must be like him, be on the side of the poor, <i>with</i> them, in all the circumstances of their life. This leads us to a spirit of detachment, release from the bonds of goods and consumerism; it will induce groups to live as did the first Jesus community, the original church of those called by him to go and sell what they had, give to the poor and then follow him.</p>
<p class="indent">This one, who opted for the poor to liberate them, loved them so much that he emptied himself to become this form of Eucharist, wherein he presents his body to us as sign and token of the kind of unity he wants all men to have eventually, starting from the now of life. The teaching of Jon Sobrino is relevant here, for he shows that Jesus’ action and preaching and prophetic option indicated radical rupture with the synagogal type of religion. Jesus’ prophetic option led to his death. So, we should take within the scope of the Eucharist not only the <i>how</i> of his life and death but also the <i>why</i> of it. Into this <i>why</i> comes his comparatively early death, because he stood for the human, fought for the poor. The following of Jesus (cf. Segundo Galilea) demands that we also defend what he defended, loving and preferring what he loved and preferred. In this we risk death ourselves.</p>
<p class="indent">It is this Jesus who asked that we preach to all nations—and nations are structures of society that today spew broken-down persons, oppressed, alienated caricatures of what the Father meant his children to be, and this, especially, in the Third World.</p>
<p class="indent">If, in third-world countries and elsewhere, the Synod of Justice (1971) is used for catechesis, instruction, education, prayer and reflection-action, we would avoid the senseless controversy on liberation theology and its allied tergiversations in high places. Why fear universal teaching?</p>
<p class="indent">The Good News of Jesus is, first of all, himself and his life as being the basis of all endeavour for the follower: “If you wish to be my disciple, you must deny yourself…if you wish to follow me, sell what you have and give to the poor…he who loves his life will lose it and he who despises his life in this world will keep it unto life everlasting…go and do likewise…love one another as I have loved you…take up your cross and follow me…”—these are imperious demands and yet coming from one who is very human and very understanding of our broken selves, one who would not quench the smoking flax nor crush the bruised reed. These demands have Jesus’ example or self-emptying (<i>kenosis</i> in Philippians 2) as their basis. And yet, herein lies the challenge: It has been done, it can be done. No one who ever faced these challenges found himself discouraged. Jesus lived them out first in his life, showing himself free and forgetful of self.</p>
<p class="indent">In the small groups of Christians and religious who come here, we have much sharing of this message of Jesus Poor. We take it as a part of Education for Justice in the spirit of the Synod of Justice mentioned earlier.</p>
<p class="indent">The Church's presentation of this liberating Jesus—and his Name is <a id="page_196"/>translatable in any language as Saviour-Redeemer-Liberator—must continue in education: “Education demands a renewal of heart, a renewal based on the recognition of sin in its social and individual manifestations. Education will also include and inculcate a truly and entirely human way of life in justice, love, simplicity. Education will awaken a critical sense, which will lead us to reflect on the society in which we live and on its values. In the developing countries, the principal aim of education is for justice, and it consists in an attempt to awaken consciences to a knowledge of the concrete situation and in a call to secure a total improvement: by these means the transformation of the world has already begun.”<sup><a href="#fnr8" id="fn8">8</a></sup></p>
<p class="indent">The open-hearted Jesus-community Christian after the Council (Vat. II) will see in Jesus the narrow way which is indeed the broad way of love for all. He will see in the Buddha the basis of the Buddhist's constant assertion: “<i>siyalu sattvayo nidukvethva</i>” (may all beings be happy). In it he would see a constant appeal for self-forgetfulness (<i>anatta</i>) in the life of the Buddha. Born of a princely, landowning family, he followed that inner urge of the higher self (“<i>atta hi attano natho</i>,” self is the lord of self) to leave all things and go search for the truth; he never gave up the search, whether with his mentors Alara the Kalama or Udekka Ramaputta, or with himself, but looked beyond. He used the Dhamma, word, and changed the hearts of many a hearer, helped make the bad good and the good better by his example of selflessness. The four sublime states or <i>brahmaviharas</i>—metta, karuna, mudita, upekkha—are operative in Buddhism: they are loving, kindness, compassion, gladness at another's well-being, and equanimity. <i>Metta</i> or <i>maitri</i> is from <i>mejjati</i>, melting, a word so closely knit with the “bowels of compassion” in meaning. In these as in every one of the <i>pansil</i> (five precepts) and the <i>dasaparamita</i> (ten perfections), there is a radical turning away from self to the Other. When Bhikkhu Kassapa of Ampitiya took a copy of the New Testament to his Buddhist dhamma class on Sunday afternoons, he did so with red-ink markings on every sentence he found helpful to understand selflessness in the Christian way. When the Ven. Alutgama Dhammananda, in 1965, at the Malwatta Vihara, Kandy, wanted a Catholic priest to speak on “self-denial in the life of Christ and self-denial in the Dhammapada (of a Buddhist canon),” he too was looking for the common ground of a common urge to deny self so that others might grow.</p>
<p class="indent">Now, the Christian says that to believe in Jesus is to believe that he is divine. Some have money, ambition, power, profits, prestige, self and so forth as gods, as source of meaning and strength and drive. To believe that Jesus is divine is to choose him, to make a deliberate choice of him and what he stands for as our God. By his praxis, Jesus changed the content of the word <i>God</i>. If Jesus is our Lord and God, we must allow him to change our image of the unimaginable, transcendent God. Jesus is the Word of God, because he reveals God to us. God does not reveal Jesus to us. God <a id="page_197"/>is not the word of Jesus; that is, our ideas about God cannot cast any light on the life of Jesus.</p>
<p class="indent">God is the acme, the supreme source of selflessness, says the Christian. In Jesus we begin to see God's plan in its most human and incarnate expression as it reveals God's criteria: his mercy, his justice, his search for the lost sheep, his deep love for the little ones, the little flock, his demands, his love—a “contemplative Christology,” as Segundo Galilea terms it.</p>
<p class="indent">Albert Nolan, in <i>Jesus Before Christianity</i>, holds that, “Our God does not want to be served by us, but wants to serve us; God does not want to be given the highest possible rank and status in our society, but wants to take the lowest place and to be without any rank and status; God does not want to be feared and obeyed, but wants to be recognized in the sufferings of the poor and the weak; God is not supremely indifferent and detached, but is irrevocably committed to the liberation of humankind, for God has chosen to be identified with all people in a spirit of solidarity and compassion. If this is not a true picture of God, then Jesus is not divine. If this is a true picture of God, then God is more truly human, more thoroughly humane, than any human being. God is, what Schillebeeckx has called, a <i>Deus humanissimus</i>, a supremely human God.”<sup><a href="#fnr9" id="fn9">9</a></sup></p>
<p class="indent">For the man of faith, therefore, who begins reading the signs of the times as Jesus read them and answered with his life and death, the terminology of static nature of metaphysical realities may seem necessary, but may take second place. And who can blame him, for Christianity is not meant to be a following of Jesus only by academe. It is a real-life matter. Such a man of God, given faith, will say that Jesus’ divinity is not an addition to his humanity. In Jesus, the human and the divine have been so united that Jesus’ divinity is the transcendent depths of his humanity. Jesus was immeasurably more human than other men and that is what we value when we say he is divine, when he is acknowledged as our Lord and God.<sup><a href="#fnr10" id="fn10">10</a></sup></p>
<p class="indent">Jesus claimed to be the truth. In him the truth became flesh. (He felt to be a being at complete harmony with God.) Feeling and thinking with the mind and heart of God, he had no need to rely on any authority outside his own rich experience. He showed this all the way, with his life, compassion, passion-death-resurrection.</p>
<p class="body-text3"><b><i>Confessing the Buddha-Dhamma in a Buddhist context</i></b></p>
<p class="indent">If we confess to a Total Christ, open on the reality of today's world through the Jesus community which he formed, then the very following of Jesus becomes a Jesus praxis.</p>
<p class="indent">It would inevitably lead us to “give honor to whom honor is due and to understand that renown, honor and peace come to all who do good” (Rom. 2:10). We could then proclaim to the world that Muhammad and the Buddha do not belong exclusively to these denominations or ways of life, but to the whole world and to all of mankind.</p>
<p class="indent">We in our village felt we had to give witness to the selflessness of the <a id="page_198"/>Buddha, his renunciation, his praxis of detachment, his rejection of <i>lobha, dosa, moha</i>, the triple concupiscence, his <i>samanatma ta</i> (sense of equality and justice).</p>
<p class="indent">Without ever attempting to replace what or whom he “denied,” if he did, the Buddha did not refer any glory to himself in his person, but only to the moment of the Enlightenment or its excellence. The manifest intent was: better to be enlightened than not to be; or in later language, it is better to be a <i>bodhisattva</i> (one who gives one's life for others) than not to be. There were and have been other Buddhas for other ages, but this Buddha is for this age. This is why the Enlightened One or the self-realized One is regarded as a refuge (a <i>sarana</i>). Even if mother or father were to disregard anyone, the <i>Buddhu-amme</i> (Buddha as mother) or the <i>Buddha-piye</i> (Buddha as father) will be near him/her…is an oft heard remark in the village.</p>
<p class="indent">Involving the people in decision-making, a week after our arrival here, we invited the people to see if it were opportune to start a clinic day every month. A lengthy discussion on the feasibility and mode of it, as a monthly exercise, proceeded and decision followed: “Plan it as you like; we will provide two nurses to be trained. You consulted us for permission. Go ahead also with our blessing.” On the third monthly clinic day, October 1980, D. Karunapala, a youth leader, uttered these words at a <i>pilisandara</i> (causerie): “You always induce us to go to <i>bana</i> preaching in the temple. The monk's preaching of the <i>dhamma-word</i> should form our life. You always say: ‘<i>Vairayen, vairaya no samsindeth</i>’ (Hatred is never appeased by hatred but by love alone: Dhammapada), but, tell me, what is the real meaning of ‘Buddhuvenava’ (becoming a Buddha)? I think it is to do what you are doing here: to see to the sick and distressed. Even the sick man is a Buddha if he leads you to live the Dhamma. If you help him to be cured, you too can become a Buddha. Why should I go to the temple and listen to <i>bana</i>? Religion cannot be relegated to the temple, nor life to ritual.” A useful, healthy discussion ensued. Hence, our making available some religious space for getting to know the Buddha praxis more deeply made the Dhamma more firm (dharma) in the hearts of people.</p>
<p class="indent">Such dialogue is not a question of vogue, fashionableness or expediency. It is born of imminent need and human brotherhood to assert that religion is better than irreligion and that humanity's widest scope must take the cultural and religious, no less than the social and political, into account in the integral life of Man, of men and women, now.</p>
<p class="body-text3"><b><i>Confessing Jesus in a Buddhist Context</i></b></p>
<p class="indent">We saw how the contemporary Jesus must be shown forth by today's Jesus community as witness to Jesus. We saw how good it is to give witness to the Truth in a Buddhist context, drawing principles and lines of action from the Buddhist. There seems really no need for a third, because embryonically the open-Jesus message and universal appeal is manifest in the first and second moments already. In other words, if we share our faith in <a id="page_199"/>the contemporary Jesus with all Christians, we will surely acknowledge the Buddha's role in liberation. And doing both these we will manifest the true Jesus to the world.</p>
<p class="indent">Montchemil is supposed to have said that no one is a proper missionary who having gone to a people, does not see that the Jesus spirit, the saving spirit of love, has been there at work already before him. That is the spirit of openness and kindliness and self-sacrifice best understood by the faithful Christian as much as by the faithful Buddhist.</p>
<p class="indent">“I was hungry and you gave me to eat,” said Jesus. “I was thirsty and you gave me drink,” or again: “I was a stranger and you took me in.” So says Christian spirituality, drawing its lines from the Gospel according to Matthew. Going into the village of Illuklanda off Monaragala in 1976 for a survey, we saw a poor man who built a makeshift house and at the end of the day made a shelf of simple planks, placing thereon a pot of water (waterpot for merit, or <i>pinthaliya</i>) so that the “poor traveller might slake his thirst.” We imitated him here in our hut too, since our first day in this place. Then again, the daily <i>dana</i> (midday offering of a meal as alms) and the annual <i>dansela</i> (food = gift meal hall for Vesak) are signs of giving the other something to eat and thus satisfying hunger, much as the <i>pindapatha</i> (the food placed in the monk's begging bowl) could be a sign of a farming people's prosperity or penury, depending on whether the food is higher or lower than the “equator” of the bowl. Then too, the <i>ambalama</i> (the wayfarers’ inn) was the Buddhist way of saying that he took in the traveller and the stranger. Names like Ambalantota, Ambalangoda in Sri Lanka are quite self-explanatory as wayside inns to welcome the stranger of yore.</p>
<p class="indent">Word hidden in the world, Jesus speaks in different ways and presences. But, the earliest presence of Christ, through a baptized group of British invaders, was harmful; the scar remains even if wounds are healed. We will have to let it be proven that ours is not a harmful presence but a presence for the good of the people.</p>
<p class="indent">Furthermore, Jesus did not invent the cross. One day I had forgotten to wear my cross-badge and Ran Banda, a small lad, said he would run into the house and get it before I started on my journey. To which the son of a mason replied: “There is really no need to rush to get the cross, because the cross is a sign of sorrow. We know it already. It is a <i>haras kepima</i>, an opposition to my will. I wish to do something and I'm called to do something else. See, every door has a lintel and two doorposts. Yesterday my father bought a wire mesh, and it has hundreds of crosses. That is why Jesus took a cross as a sign of his life.” This incident took place in September 1980, when our hut was still a-building. The cross was a sign of contradiction, of juncture, of opposites, as universal as ever. Jesus accepted it as a political instrument of torture under the imperialist government of Rome. The cross has never been the same again for a Christian, whether he hangs it round his neck or is stretched on it as on a rack of torture both for himself and his fellow countrymen. St. Paul can still go on saying: “I preach Christ and <a id="page_200"/>Christ crucified,” and we feel he would be happy to see the cross emerging from the so-called uninitiated so far away from the Greek wisdom that failed to grasp the folly of the cross.</p>
<p class="indent">In March 1981 a <i>samghikadana</i> (almsgiving to the Sangha or monkhood) was given to six monks of the area. It had not occurred to us that this might have been the first time. At the <i>bana</i>-preaching following the meal, the chief monk announced: “This could well be the first time that a <i>dana</i> has been given to Buddhist monks in a Christian place. It is a historic action. I ask Father to come to the temple hall and teach Christianity to our teachers and relate it to other religions.” A letter corroborated the invitation the next day.</p>
<p class="indent">Or take the Buddhist pilgrimage organized together with the farmers at their request in March 1982 to the ruined cities, to Anuradhapura and its eight holy places. The 48 farmers, and their wives and children, had visited the famed Polonnaruwa Gal Vihara, which had fascinated the Trappist Thomas Merton, and seen the Standing, Seated and Recumbent Buddha. What was their surprise on quietly entering a room to see an enormous, agonizing Christ. In the semi-darkness of the chapel—for it was the community chapel they had entered—the following dialogue took place:</p>
<table cellpadding="0" cellspacing="0" style="margin-top:20px; margin-bottom:20px; padding-left:20px; padding-right:10px;" width="100%">
<col width="22%"/>
<col width="78%"/>
<tr>
<td valign="top">Woman one:</td>
<td valign="top">“…and who is this? I feel sorry for him. <i>Ane matadukkhai</i>.”</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td valign="top">Woman two:</td>
<td valign="top">“You see, this is their Christ, their God (<i>devio</i>).”</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td valign="top">Woman three:</td>
<td valign="top">“Yes, he also gave his life for others.”</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td valign="top">Woman one:</td>
<td valign="top">“Yes, it's just like the Buddha. He also cut himself in pieces as the Jataka story says.”</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td valign="top">Woman two:</td>
<td valign="top">“Yes, but that's only a story. It didn't happen.”</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td valign="top">Woman one:</td>
<td valign="top">“That may be, but I'm very sorry about this man, Christ. Why did he die such a violent death?”</td>
</tr>
</table>
<p class="indent">The priest who overheard was about to leave the chapel when they asked him: “Now tell us the whole story of his death.” And they, who were looking for real freedom, listened, knowing full well that speaker and listeners had to be converted to the Truth of selflessness and sharing, justice and peace.</p>
<p class="subhead1"><b>I<small>S</small> J<small>ESUS</small> S<small>HOWN</small> F<small>ORTH</small> H<small>ERE</small>?</b></p>
<p class="indent">Wherever we are, we are the Jesus community and must act and express ourselves the way Jesus wants us to do, for Jesus and the Jesus community have to be one in all that is not sin. If, then, the Jesus community has the mind of Christ and acts like him and in him, those who see the Jesus community will somehow discover the Jesus praxis and be drawn to the living of Truth in <i>metta</i>, or a doing of the truth in love.</p>
<p class="indent">On August 25, 1984, Piyatilleke, a young peasant boy, said in conversation, “Some say that Muslims, by religious rule, help only Muslims, but <a id="page_201"/>here, I see that your rules allow help to be given to Buddhists. As Christians, you do not pretend riches but live united with us. You also educate our Buddhist children and drop-outs, without asking anything in return. That is <i>loku pinak</i> (a meritorious act).” His companion Ratnayake added, “You live like us and close to us without exploiting us (<i>sura kemen thoravan</i>). You are friendly and want our true good (<i>sebe yahapatha</i>). You are religious (<i>pevidi</i>) and observe it with kindness, prayer, ritual. Then also you honor the Buddha who we venerate as our teacher and master.” To which Gunapala added: “Whatever you do, you do well and fully. You do good. In that way, you help the country. Yours is a good life without trouble to anyone. Some are good to their own people; you are good to all. I like that, and that is why I come here.”</p>
<p class="indent">A youth leader said he wanted to write down, in his own tongue, what a lot he learnt from us. We place it here, <i>in toto</i>:</p>
<p class="blockquote1">“I will accept Jesus as founder of a noble religion, one who showed a sincere love and affection for people (<i>janathava</i>). He had no ‘high’ and ‘low’ but loved all as equals, and equally lovable. His life shows this admirably. Owing to this I cannot empty him out of my mind. As for other religious leaders and founders, I revere them.</p>
<p class="blockquote-indent">“Because the Church truly lays claims to much wealth and property, she cannot change the existing unjust system. It is difficult to think she will. Even though some, or even many, within its ranks are doing something for the true progress of human society, yet because the decision of many more is victorious, truth is sent underground and untruth seems to advance. But it is very clear that the <i>Suba Seth Gedera</i> group (your house and team) is untiring in its efforts to see that truth will win and that people will surely better themselves.</p>
<p class="blockquote-indent">“Perhaps more than 99% Buddhists are found in this area, and for about five years, this little church-group has honored our traditional and time-honored customs and culture, and large numbers in this village area have already accepted the quiet effective good done by this group. We also like the friendly openness with which you work with our people.</p>
<p class="blockquote-indent">“At the start, a few young people were watching you carefully: ‘How will you act towards us?’ ‘Did you come to turn us to your ways somehow?’ or ‘Were you an international spy group or spy ring to eventually sell out our village?’—were questions which harassed us young people. But we went beyond mere observing and worked with you in your humble efforts as you worked with our people. There we discovered the true face of what you call <i>sabhava</i>, the Church.</p>
<p class="blockquote-indent">“I now see after all these years and for the last year especially, that this little Christian group—all of you—have understood our sorrow, our plight (<i>dukvedana</i>) and are really very loving and compassionate towards our people, especially the poor. Despite objections of a few <a id="page_202"/>who dislike the poor, the work of three of you has gone on. It is a valuable service: to rescue and teach the drop-outs, to supply what is wanting in the school schemata as regards certain subjects, to help adults in non-formal education, in short, to give us a hand; by assuring continuity of a reasonable distribution of infant food (<i>triposha</i>) from the government, by helping in a clinic day program, seeing to primary health care with a team of barefoot nurses drawn from our own village, and now working with a wider field of 14 villages or so of this area; by helping self-sufficiency in agricultural inputs by training ten farmers to do research and have technical advice on local fertilizer (bio-fertilizer) according to traditional methods; thus showing you want our culture to advance, and so you honor our happy past. We also have had, due to you, training in culture and dance items for the less-skilled but eager, and we have had slide-shows, which really have helped us live. You helped us with a library of 400 books and now, a 3000 coconut-plant scheme. It is for the poor. All this proves the true meaning of <i>Suba Seth Gedara</i>, the name of your house, ‘Good wishes house.’ You wish us well and want our true good. There is a new awakening among us, a renewal.</p>
<p class="blockquote-indent">“Were anyone to ask me, I could say: ‘We know them as Christians, as a Christian group by the name of Jesus they possess and profess. But they haven't tried to foist their religion or religious beliefs on us.’ Of course, to a Buddhist community, this presence of yours is a threat, a menace—some people may imagine. They are few who think so. Why do they think so and why are they disturbed? ‘Although this small, Christian group does not parade its beliefs or have public cult, yet there is a very large crowd of people who like them and who realize the value of their service.’…I can say this to those who ask me. So, if anyone tries it, let them know that the villagers cannot be torn apart from this group. A very large number of young people, boys and girls and little children, honor and revere the Suba Seth Godara and Susith Bavana group and accept them.</p>
<p class="blockquote-indent">“In former times, the Christian religion was preached and proclaimed with guns and bayonets. Many subtle methods were used, but this small Christian group, by helping the people in a real spirit of service, has sunk deep into the hearts of the people. Their presence has been accepted as up-building. It is a peaceful living together and is a great support for peace and reconciliation.</p>
<p class="blockquote-indent">“The example of this Christian group will never be forgotten by the growing ones of the village. To the Christian churches at large and to other religions, this is an immense example and a challenge. If, in this way, and with this background, every village could have such a course of action, a new light will dawn. Of this I am certain. Only then will village peace spread throughout the land. Then, an intelligent, wise <a id="page_203"/>and exemplary people will arise in our country. The people will have a consoling, happy life.</p>
<p class="blockquote-indent">“In the process of changing structures, this kind of activity might be termed ‘reformist’ by some, and yet what do we do with the sick, those who are bedridden, the destitute and illiterate and the weak? How shall we take them along with us in the onward march of the country? How can they go if they are not helped?</p>
<p class="blockquote-indent">“This small Christian group works in such a situation, when other religious groups may be collecting money (<i>mudal garageniman</i>, literally, ‘raking in the shekels’—ed.), when some are locked in a competitive cut-throat struggle. What the masses choose and the people opt for is right. That is the people's choice. This group is their choice. Let those who will, decry the choice or hurl insults. Truth will prevail. If their decisions are right, people will stand by this group. Their example will be the people's mainstay. It will be impossible to separate the people from such a group. Those who have a real love and show forth real love for the people, will never, ever leave the people.</p>
<p class="blockquote-indent">“I say this to the group: ‘Be with us and act with us in the future too. May you show the way. We wish you courage, strength and determination.’ ”<sup><a href="#fnr11" id="fn11">11</a></sup></p>
<p class="indent1">A young peasant farmer, by thus wishing courage to a group to go ahead in collaboration, has honored the dignity of men and women. A deep chord may have been struck in relationships that spell holiness, in a spirituality that would take in the economic, social, political, cultural, and religious aspects of the human. Do not the Christian humanism and the Buddhist humanism point towards the total salvation or liberation of man from sin and all evil?</p>
<p class="subhead1"><b>L<small>IBERATION OF THE</small> H<small>UMAN FROM</small> K<small>LESAS</small> (<small>STAIN</small>)</b></p>
<p class="indent"><i>All reality: cosmos and man, world and nature are summed up in the Word</i>.</p>
<p class="indent">Sometime in 1965, Horst Symanowski, a social worker of Berlin, said: “Today's question is ‘How can I find a gracious neighbor?’ We no longer ask the question: ‘How can I find a gracious God?’ or we label it antiquated. A different question haunts us today: ‘How can I find a gracious neighbor? How can we still live at peace with one another?’ ”</p>
<p class="indent">God is not the first known. This is part of the depth of humility, the magnanimity of God. Even in His Word made flesh, or enfleshed (as Rahner would say), the Godhead is hidden. God sent his Word into the world which he loved so much as to bring into existence in Verbo, in the Word, with Word as model and example. Protology, then, is based on the Word; so is eschatology, the last reality, for consummation will also be in the Word. In between, the ongoing process of the Kingdom or reign of God is also under the guidance of the Word Incarnate. It comforts the Christian in his <a id="page_204"/>faith to realize that all religious aspirations and all history of past and present, and prognostique for the future is a <i>deroulement</i> of the Word and that all of reality is contained in the Word.</p>
<p class="indent">This Word is also word of protest: <i>pro-testis</i> (witness on behalf of…) and of prophetism (to speak on behalf of the Truth), correcting deviations, judging malpractices. Judaism was a protest religion against the evil of oppression in rich “Egypt.” Mahavina, founder of Jainism, and the Buddha, founder of Buddhism, both protested against (it was a protest for) wrong attitudes, of selfishness in the Hinduism of their day. Islam became a prophetic religion outside Israel defending the Word of God (<i>Kalima</i>) as also defending the orphan and the widow, for human reality is born of Allah's word: “Be and it is” (<i>kunfa yakunu</i>). Today, too, Islam stands at the gate of the Third World in vehement protest against evil.</p>
<p class="indent">What we see and know on the world level today and especially on an Asian level (not to say third-world level) is the human being's inhumanity to his fellow humans. In such a situation the Word in the world must be a corrective, reconciling, uniting word of truth which liberates. Why should the Church or the local Jesus community come and introduce the self-emptying Christ as if he were self-aggrandizing, accumulating, spreading the leaven all over the dough and making the food salty rather than salted? Why make the <i>incognite</i> Christ cognite as the Son of God, parading him as Son of God rather than son of man before they tested him as a man among men?</p>
<p class="indent">It must however be said that Buddhism is a soteriology, for it has a thrust of <i>moksha, vimukti</i> (from <i>munc-muncati</i>), which means liberation or release. Aloysius Pieris asserts that “soteriology is the foundation of theology” and that the universally valid starting point or basis of interreligious collaboration is Liberation rather than God.<sup><a href="#fnr12" id="fn12">12</a></sup></p>
<p class="indent">Nor should anyone write off Buddhism arrogantly by saying that it is atheistic. Let's hear their case. There is a Transcendent impersonal Absolute in Buddhism, termed Nibbana. But just as it is distasteful for the Muslim to hear that God is “Father,” and that due to legitimate historical reasons of his own, so too it is unpleasant for the Buddhist to hear that the Transcendent impersonal Absolute is “three persons”—because “person” for him is a highly corruptible, disintegrating thing as <i>puggala</i>, individual. He hardly links up “person” with the <i>akalika buddhi</i> (timeless intelligence) or the <i>amat sacca</i> (truth that is beyond death). He feels that we say that the Transcendent is a threefold corruptible and terminable. Besides, the English and Anglo-Saxon “Gott” or “God,” although translated in the Sinhala liturgy as <i>Devatide</i> (<i>Deum de Deo</i>, God of God), comes up against the same title given to the Buddha as <i>devatudeva</i> the one who has purified himself by his light (<i>dipa</i> or <i>div</i> or <i>dev</i>), carrying it to perfection, for he took eighteen thousand eons to purify himself or enlighten himself and thus went beyond all <i>devas</i> (gods) who can fall back from goodness and purity.</p>
<a id="page_205"/>
<p class="indent">Dr. Gunapala Dharmasiri, speaking on the goal of morality, once said: “As forms of ethical cultures, Buddhism agrees with Christianity. As God is all good, it is necessary to perfect oneself morally in order to reach union with him. The Christian who thus becomes perfect morally invariably attains Nibbana. Similarly, the Buddhist who attains moral perfection, attains union with God.”<sup><a href="#fnr13" id="fn13">13</a></sup> Likewise, at a seminar held at Pilimatalawa, Kandy, in 1977, Dr. Lily de Silva ended with: “Now I know. It is not conversion, not converting me or my fellow Buddhists, that you are seeking. It is in seeing and appreciating my values, our Buddhist values, our spirituality, our effort at peace, sharing, justice, what you call Kingdom values. If you get the Kingdom and I am allowed to set my goal as the final peace of Nibbana, then you are not despairing about my future. Then I am glad. We can live together, we can get to know and have <i>metta</i> for each other.”<sup><a href="#fnr14" id="fn14">14</a></sup></p>
<p class="indent">Buddhism thus focuses attention on man. Makhala Gosala had held that <i>samsara suddhi</i> (salvation through <i>gamenena</i> or wayfaring through rebirths) would suffice for man's salvation-liberation. The Buddha likened him to a fisherman casting his net at the mouth of a river for the destruction of many fish (AN.1.33). Reflecting him, the Buddha held <i>attakare</i> (free will) rather than <i>akiriyavada</i>, which is more akin to the popular use of <i>karma</i> as fate or non-use of will. Human initiative, enterprise, endeavour, courage, perseverance, human instrumentality were thus upheld by the Buddha. Buddhism thus extols man's humanness and greatness of free will, a point which amazed Vladimir Soloviev “that in a doctrine of no-self, so much stress is paid to the human.”<sup><a href="#fnr15" id="fn15">15</a></sup></p>
<p class="indent">If the Buddhists are in touch with the Jesus community and if by his favor, the community presents the human face of Jesus, then by its mediation, the Buddhists are in touch with Jesus. They will follow Jesus from afar doing what he wants and what he did. They will be followers of Jesus and the Jesus praxis without even knowing it—Vesak light or the Light of Asia, or Sir Edwin Arnold's poem of that name, on the Buddha can never be against Christmas or Easter light. They will be touched by the Buddha, their immediate teacher, whose <i>aryas-tangika magga</i> they follow—the eightfold path. It is a human way and a righteous way, for “man is the way for the Church” said Pope John Paul II in his first encyclical on the Redeemer of Man. No one who knows both the righteous eightfold Path and the New Testament can fail to echo the words of John: “He who does right is righteous as he is righteous” (1 Jn. 3:7)…“everyone who does right is born of him” (1 Jn. 2:29). The words used are <i>dikaiosune dikaios</i>, justice, quite redolent of the <i>samma</i> (right) in the eightfold path: right speech, right action, right livelihood (<i>sila</i>), right effort, right mindfulness, right concentration (<i>samadhi</i>), right understanding, and right thought (<i>prajna</i>). This is the only way to remove suffering, says the Buddha, for it is a path of righteousness.</p>
<p class="indent">The Word in the world expresses itself as <i>bana</i>, the corrective word of morality, which when lived to the full is capable of bringing men and women <a id="page_206"/>to the haven of peace through righteousness which is identical with the biblical peace through justice, so relevant even today. In Jesus, the Word of God showed us not only communication between God and men-women, but also the <i>logos</i> or the <i>mind of God</i>. We know God's will and mind by looking at the word of Jesus of Nazareth: he who fed the hungry, healed the sick, comforted the sad and lonely, preached the truth, who was a friend of outcasts and sinners, and who “stuck out his neck” for mankind, and man's rights.</p>
<p class="subhead1"><b>I<small>NHUMANNESS IN</small> A<small>SIA</small></b></p>
<p class="indent">The Church's credibility is at stake in Asia today. How long will Asia be made to say that it likes Jesus but would withdraw from Christianity? We know what could well from within man: goodness, kindness, sympathy, compassion, the <i>saradharma</i>, but what we see is quite other.</p>
<p class="indent">The Word is in the world. So is Asia. And has the Word nothing to say to an Asia that is slowly being crucified on the rack of pain? This nailing and crucifixion are carried out right into the villages of rural Asia—<i>pagans</i> (from <i>pagus</i>, village) and <i>paysans</i> (French for peasant) being gaily mixed in favor of the semanticists and anthropologists, and the shopping complex, supermarket, agribusiness cartel, law of the sea are all turned against the poor.</p>
<p class="indent">How can quiet, peaceful Asia, cradle of many religions of the world, live peacefully when she is told: “Let Asians fight Asians” and when her people are decimated by indiscriminate family planning? Where the quantity of the poor in the world is reduced so that the standard of life of the white Western world may be raised—a terrible indictment on Christianity which should have shown the Jesus praxis of opting for life and having it more abundantly. More than that, while larger nations are banding together or at the other end of the scale, we see small countries cut up in a vicious neo-colonialism on the principle of “divide and rule”: Vietnam was cut up into north and south, Korea is still divided into north and south, majestic India is now cut up into Pakistan and Bangladesh. And foreign backers, for their own ends, adore the plan of a Khalistan and Tamilnadu. While peace prizes reach some, others get only the bullet, depending on whether remote causes of exploitation and oppression are left aside or raked up.</p>
<p class="indent">Then again, while most colonizers condescended to grant flag-independence and apparently pull away, some returned in a more voracious, yet subtle, manner to deplete villages through the transnational corporations, to commandeer large tracts of land in the name of benign development projects (whose development, really?). Trees of great girth and value—satinwood, teak, ironwood, whole forests of them, are raped, wantonly felled with razor-edge machines, then heaped up and burnt with the flames of a people's aspirations; birds’ nests, generations of birds are lopped off; beehives and honey (so needed for the poor) are wrecked forever; deer, <a id="page_207"/>sambhur, elephants are lunged at and killed, the prime resources of poor countries, the jungle habitats, gone forever in the name of a nebulous development that spells bondage.</p>
<p class="indent">And the irony of it is in a possible desertification. The operation of destruction in one area known to us left dry seven once-gurgling streams which first drew the multinational companies to that area. Today the streams are dry because of the clearing. The Buddhist peasants have no Rutilio Grande or Oscar Romero to fight for them, only a few Buddhist monks and some of their own farmers. The whole process brings the institutional religions to disrepute and results in the sullen silencing of the people rendered voiceless because landless, but a hidden power, hopeful and renewed all the while, rests with them.</p>
<p class="indent">Does the Jesus community in the world show anxiety that the developing countries have fallen into a debt trap engineered by the big blocs of the world? Hasn't the World Bank admitted that it cannot reach the Third World's poorest people?</p>
<p class="indent">Pascal's words are still verified: “Jesus is in agony till the end of time. We must not sleep till then. This agony (struggle) well describes the tragedy of rural Asia. Jesus suffers in the suffering poor. Every time we learn of the failure of an UNCTAD, Jesus suffers in the poor; their hopes raised high and dashed low when proper prices for raw materials are not paid, low salaries given, buffer stocks not raised, when pesticides rejected in other countries are dumped in the poorer and more voiceless ones, when poisonous inputs are so easily available to the illiterate that they die an early death. In rural areas Jesus suffers each time the poor man's <i>chena</i> is sold off or grabbed when the aforementioned multinational companies hold sway; when rain holds off or a flood comes at the wrong time, sometimes with neighboring seas disturbed with submarine nuclear tests, Jesus suffers in the poor man. After a hard day's work, he sits up all night in the <i>pela</i> (watch-hut made of poles and sticks) listening to marauding wild boar and elephant. Sleepless nights follow as he goes about wanting to feed his wife and children, till the harvest comes and indebtedness stares him in the face. Strong market forces are pitted against him and his soul is sorrowful even unto death” (<i>mata marenda tharam dukkhai</i>). “All sufferers in history appear as special servants of Jesus, the Suffering Servant.” In them, there is a deeper and profound presence of Christ, says Leonardo Boff.</p>
<p class="subhead1"><b>C<small>ONCLUSION</small></b></p>
<p class="indent">Jesus’ suffering among the people is the Passion. It needed a courageous man to tell the world by his praxis that “profound religion leads to political commitment and in a country such as ours where injustice reigns, conflict is inevitable.” So said El Salvador's late Archbishop Romero, who died defending the Word and his peasants against a repressive military regime. When a dictatorship seriously threatens human rights and the common <a id="page_208"/>good of the nation, when they become insupportable and close themselves to all channels of dialogue, understanding and rationality, then the church speaks of the legitimate right to insurrectional violence. It is such religious, faithful forthrightness that is prophecy.</p>
<p class="indent">Jesus was accused of being a political man, disturbing the false peace of Israel under imperialist Rome. One of the charges against him was that he forbade the paying of tribute to Caesar, when the real praise should have been that he upheld the “things that are of God”—namely, what all his bystanders must surely have known: the land, the resources and the people, Yahweh's own possession which through the Covenant had passed to the people.</p>
<p class="indent">We situate our conclusion under six aspects of challenge:</p>
<p class="indent"><b>Biblically:</b> <i>Dharmayano</i> or the Dhamma word personified is the new term used in the Sinhala Bible. The <i>dharma</i>, stable norm of all life, is the still point in the turning world of <i>samsara</i>. The <i>dharma</i> is also the norm of relational holiness: “Be holy as I am holy” (Lev. 20:7). If the Spirit blows where he will, he can inspire truths in other moral codes. If we distinguish static truths (like two and two equals four) and operative truths, these that men and women live by, we can see that the Spirit who can never contradict himself has been in the scriptures of many a code.</p>
<p class="indent"><b>Theologically:</b> To emphasize the need for presenting the deeply human side of Christ in no way means the denial of the sonship of God. One could meet him as the Word of life, enfleshed as the Word of life in the world of every-day reality, where depth of relationship becomes holiness. The conclusions of Chalcedon or Ephesus are not rejected or abandoned but absorbed into the main-stream of history. Jesus takes us to greater truths as orthopraxis rather than mere orthodoxy.</p>
<p class="indent"><b>The uniqueness of Christ and Christ crucified:</b> This is an appeal of Paul and an inner demand of the Christian faithful according to the Christian scriptures. Christ is being re-crucified today as a corporate community, especially among the poor who manifest him. His passover from sin to holiness (Jn. 13:1) is seen in the passion and death of the people, and his resurrection is seen every time they band together in the hope of new life and community building, this last belonging to his kingship. The Word builds community.</p>
<table cellpadding="0" cellspacing="0" style="margin-top:20px; margin-bottom:20px; padding-left:20px; padding-right:20px;" width="100%">
<col width="50%"/>
<col width="50%"/>
<tr>
<td style="padding-right: 20px;" valign="top">Founder (Buddha)—presented the Word, and that word built the Samgha (<i>sam</i>)</td>
<td style="padding-left: 20px;" valign="top">God presented the Word, the Word built the Community (<i>com</i>)</td>
</tr>
</table>
<p class="indent">The Messiah emerges from the suffering people and identifies with the people. One of the key points of <i>minjung</i> theology is that the Crucifixion of Jesus took place as a historical event in the political arena.</p>
<p class="indent"><b>In the missionary sense:</b> The great Mission mandate: “Go ye and teach all nations,” is not primarily a mandate to proselytize and convert the <a id="page_209"/>individual or turn him away from his faith in goodness. Biblical conversion has no object. “Making converts” and “conversion” make no sense. Conversion is the turning away from oneself to God who is always turned to us. This is the goal of our missionary action. The evangelizer must now get evangelized and turn to the Truth. The mandate is primarily a message to “make disciples of all nations” (structures of society). There is no opposition but continuity between Lk. 4:13: “He has sent me to preach the Gospel to the poor…” and the last message: “Go ye and teach all nations,” for they are held together by Mt. 25: “I was hungry and you gave me to eat…thirsty and you gave me to drink.” This last might mean today to make political action (to agitate) to set up a water works.</p>
<p class="indent"><b>The social and liberative aspects:</b> The Buddhist schema allows not only the token of <i>samgha</i> (community) through the Theravada (Sri Lankan basic) Buddhism, but also through the Mahayana Buddhism which induces the salvation of all beings as salvation or liberation for all. Christ is the Healer: I am the Life. So dialogical collaboration takes place in matters of food, health and ill-health as reference to the Deed of Logos, the Word. The Buddha is also known as the Maha-ausadha pandita, the great wise healer. Christ is also the <i>Truth</i>: I am the Truth. The Buddha said: Truth is beyond death. Here collaboration should take place in works of education for justice, formal and non-formal ways of education and conscientization.</p>
<p class="indent"><b>Eschatologically:</b> The Exodus-Resurrection-Passover paradigm is verified in Buddhism in the Buddha's renunciation (<i>nekkhama, naiskramya</i>) each time he made a passage from evil to goodness, from selfishness to selflessness—a pattern found in Buddhist morality. The Buddha is also called a Jina or victor over evil, of <i>tanha, lobha, dosa, moha</i>. Theologically too, the messianic expectation of the people is based upon theodicy, the victory or vindication of God's justice over evil in history. The Messiah and the people actualize the justice of God in history. In that sense, true messianism, which coincides with the true role of the Maitreya Buddha or Buddha Amitabha (<i>amitayus, amida</i>), is an eschatologcial phenomenon closely linked to an apocalyptic understanding of history.</p>
<p class="indent">The liberation of men and women, rather than a direct search for God, will let us all meet in the arena of Asia, even the Third World or Sri Lanka, today. The Jesus community, born of the Word in the world, would like the Buddhist to live the truth in love (<i>metta</i>), inspired by the Buddha teaching. The upholding of human compassion does in no way mean a denial of what Christians term the Divinity. “Break captive chains…give sight to the blind…Go teach all nations…feed the hungry…take in the stranger…”—are all injunctions born of compassion. Jesus the healer, Jesus the teacher loves the masses—the <i>minjung</i>—now as then, for they are like sheep without a shepherd, and he takes them as they are, unconditionally. So too, the Buddha praxis reflects compassion for all creatures. From the Buddha's life we can deduce that he would have been serenely joyful to see One such as Jesus so profoundly human, so intensely divine.</p>
<a id="page_210"/>
<p class="indent">There is no need to ask which is first: human or divine, or is it human and divine or divine and human?</p>
<p class="indent">In the tragic vortex of today, there is not even a question of how these two natures co-exist in Christ. While holding on to what it signifies, let us push on to the truth of Christ: <i>actus fidei terminatur non ad enuntiabile sed ad rem</i>; the act of faith is not in the statement, but in the reality of it. The Jesus reality for all ages cannot be domesticated by decree but accepted and formulated, however feebly, in faith.</p>
<p class="indent">If we but knew with Sobrino that Jesus is the way to liberation, then we would know that he is not an obstacle to anyone on the Way with him, nor is that person a stumbling block when he too is on the right way.</p>
<p class="subhead"><b>NOTES</b></p>
<p class="noteitem"><a href="#fn1" id="fnr1">1</a>. The team is made up of an Oblate missionary, Fr. Michael Rodrigo OMI, and two Salvatorian missionaries, Sr. Benedict Fernando-pulle and Sr. Milburga Fernando.</p>
<p class="noteitem"><a href="#fn2" id="fnr2">2</a>. The date in our house diary is one in March 1992. The monk is Venerable Alutwela Upananda of Alutwela temple. Several other areas received drought relief, but this area was ignored.</p>
<p class="noteitem"><a href="#fn3" id="fnr3">3</a>. Harvey Cox, <i>Religion in the Secular City: Towards a Post-Modern Theology</i> (New York: Simon and Schuster, 1984) p. 304. We have borrowed the word “Dialogy” from Cox's quotation of Raschke's paper, p. 228: “Dialogue must cease to be a secondary quest or reflection about religion, but must become itself a religious quest. This kind of Dialogy will bring about an ‘interpretive tension’ says Raschke.”</p>
<p class="noteitem"><a href="#fn4" id="fnr4">4</a>. Cox, p. 228.</p>
<p class="noteitem"><a href="#fn5" id="fnr5">5</a>. Cox, p. 229.</p>
<p class="noteitem"><a href="#fn6" id="fnr6">6</a>. Cox, p. 239.</p>
<p class="noteitem"><a href="#fn7" id="fnr7">7</a>. “The Church and Human Rights,” Work Paper 1, Pont. Com. Justitia et Pax, Vatican, no. 56, p. 23.</p>
<p class="noteitem"><a href="#fn8" id="fnr8">8</a>. Synod of Justice, “Justice in the World,” TPV, 1971, pp. 12-13.</p>
<p class="noteitem"><a href="#fn9" id="fnr9">9</a>. Albert Nolan, <i>Jesus Before Christianity</i> (Maryknoll, N.Y.: Orbis Books, 1992; London: Darton, Longman, Todd, 1992), p. 167.</p>
<p class="noteitem1"><a href="#fn10" id="fnr10">10</a>. Ibid.</p>
<p class="noteitem1"><a href="#fn11" id="fnr11">11</a>. A youth leader called HMJ, a young and knowledgeable farmer gave this piece in writing, in Sinhala.</p>
<p class="noteitem1"><a href="#fn12" id="fnr12">12</a>. Aloysius Pieris, <i>An Asian Theology of Liberation</i> (Maryknoll, N.Y.: Orbis Books, 1988; and Edinburgh: T &amp; T Clark, 1988), p. 107.</p>
<p class="noteitem1"><a href="#fn13" id="fnr13">13</a>. Gunapala Dharmasiri, “The Meaning of Religion in Sri Lanka Today,” <i>Dialogue</i> 2 (1975): 7-14.</p>
<p class="noteitem1"><a href="#fn14" id="fnr14">14</a>. Lily de Silva, quoted in Michael Rodrigo, “Moral Goodness: Doorway to Final Peace,” <i>Sevaka Sevana bulletin</i> (December 1978): 262.</p>
<p class="noteitem1"><a href="#fn15" id="fnr15">15</a>. Vladimir Soloviev, <i>La justification du bien</i> (Paris: Aubier), p. 237.</p>
</div>
</body>
</html>