<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>chapter04</title>
<link href="ebook_style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
<meta content="urn:uuid:e628635c-8169-4333-a0b2-b0f205aae46e" name="Adept.expected.resource"/>
</head>
<body>
<div>
<a id="page_62"/>
<h2 class="chapternumber">4</h2>
<h2 class="chaptertitle"><big>T</big>he <big>P</big>erfect <big>R</big>ealization of <big>C</big>hange: <big>J</big>esus <big>C</big>hrist</h2>
<p class="chapterauthor">JUNG YOUNG LEE</p>
<p class="indent">Christology has been the subject of theological controversy since the Christian church came into being. The first ecumenical council was called at Nicea in 35 to define the nature of Christ, which necessitates defining the nature of the Trinity. The fundamental issue at Nicea was salvation. Athanasius maintained Christ's divine essence against the Arian heresy as a matter of life and death for the church, because Christ's nature pertains directly to human salvation. The council at Chalcedon in 451 attempted to end the controversy by a formulation designed to answer the problem of salvation. Tillich perceived correctly that “the early Church was well aware that Christology is an existentially necessary, though not a theoretically interesting, work of the Church. Its ultimate criterion, therefore, is existential itself. It is ‘soteriological,’ i.e., determined by the question of salvation. The greater the things we say about the Christ, the greater the salvation we can expect from him.”<sup><a href="#ch4-nt1" id="ch4-ntr1">1</a></sup></p>
<p class="indent">In other words, the christological question was directly related to the soteriological need of the church and for that reason acquired enormous theological importance. That is why Christian theology has paid more attention to Christ and his work than to God as creator and has commonly regarded the event of salvation as distinct from, and more important than, the event of creation. In other words, the continuity between God's creative work and his saving work has in the past been largely ignored, the saving work being attributed exclusively to the Christ and the creative work to the Father. Almost all past theology disjoins the doctrine of salvation from that of creation, giving the impression that the creation was a discrete event occurring prior to salvation.</p>
<p class="indent">The disjunction between salvation and creation, or between the Christ <a id="page_63"/>and his Father, resulted primarily from the Euclidian worldview, according to which discrete events take place in a linear time sequence. According to this worldview, creation was accomplished in a given period of time and salvation came afterward. This tendency to separate creation from redemption was reinforced by the exclusive, or “either-or,” way of thinking, according to which God's creative work must <i>either</i> precede his redemptive work or follow it. Since, according to this view, creation and redemption must be separate events, then it is right to consider Christ the redeemer separate from God the creator. In reality, however, God the savior and God the creator are one and inseparable. Although they are one, they are not identical; there is a functional difference between them. God as creator is prior to God as savior.</p>
<p class="indent">There is much evidence to support the idea that God's creativity is prior to his saving process in the world. If we attribute saving efficacy to the Christ and the creative process to the creator, we see clearly the functional primacy of the latter. Salvation is presupposed in creation, but creation is absolutely necessary to salvation because salvation means a return to the original creation.<sup><a href="#ch4-nt2" id="ch4-ntr2">2</a></sup> Moreover Jesus Christ said again and again that he came to the world to fulfill the will of his Father, the creator. Christ's work, the work of salvation, was the extension of his Father's work, the work of creation. If Christ came to do his Father's work, then what Christ did, the work of salvation, was the creator's work. Therefore salvation is contingent on creation, not the other way around. Christ's work as savior must be understood as the extension of the creator's work, that is, as God's continuing work of creation in the world. If Christ as savior did his Father's work out of filial piety, we must not attribute that work to Christ alone, since Christ did it for his Father. If Christ had done the work of salvation independently of his Father, then the work of salvation might be Christ's alone. But the testimony of Testament witnesses makes it almost unthinkable to separate the work of Christ from that of his Father. The role of savior is a subsidiary part of the role of creator.</p>
<p class="subhead"><b>PROBLEMS OF CHRISTOLOGY</b></p>
<p class="indent">The trinitarian doctrine propounded by the early church is therefore mistaken: Christ is not coequal with his Father who “sent” him to do his work. Emil Brunner, who takes the trinitarian doctrine seriously, believes that the early church, failing to understand the specific and necessary hierarchy, or precedence, of the Father, the Son, and the Holy Spirit, placed them side by side. Thus he says, “The theology of the Early Church, as we shall see, did not, it is true, alter this order, but since it had very little idea that this order ‘mattered,’ its teaching suggests three ‘persons,’ side by side; this had a disastrous effect upon the doctrine of God.”<sup><a href="#ch4-nt3" id="ch4-ntr3">3</a></sup> Nowhere in Scripture is the Son identified with the Father. Christ said, “I and the Father are one” (John 10:30), or “He who has seen me has seen the Father” (John <a id="page_64"/>14:9), but he did <i>not</i> say, “I am the Father and the Father is I.” The exigencies of salvation doctrine led the early church to make Christ coequal with the creator.</p>
<p class="indent">But God as the creator is the source of creativity and the source of all that is and will be, while Christ is only what is manifested of God. To identify the creator with the revealer, the Christ, is to deny the inexhaustible nature of the divine creativity. God as creator is more than what is manifested, and his mystery is not and will not be exhausted. He is more than the One revealed in Christ. God as creator is active where Christ is not. “Thus there are works of God which as such are precisely not works of the Son. This non-identity of God and the Son is based upon the fact that God alone is Creator, but that the Son is called simply and solely the mediator of the Creation.”<sup><a href="#ch4-nt4" id="ch4-ntr4">4</a></sup> In other words, Christ is subordinate to the creator, and his work as savior and redeemer is one part of the work of God as creator. Salvation is an element toward the consummation of creation. Everything that Jesus Christ has done or has been must be understood as an element of divine creativity. By such an approach we can correct the doctrinal errors brought about by undue emphasis on salvation alone.</p>
<p class="subhead"><b>CHRIST AS THE WORD</b></p>
<p class="indent">Christ as the foundation of the creative process is clearly expressed in the story of creation, where Christ is identical with the Word coming from the mouth of the Creator. The creation story may be the best place to begin the study of Christology, because “the Word” is more expressive of Christ than any other name. The Word was the basis of creative process: It had the power of creativity. The story of creation in Genesis—not factual but metaphorical—reveals profound truth. At each stage of the creative process God <i>speaks</i>, saying, “Let there be…” God's word, in Genesis, is the power of generation; it is not a static, descriptive attribute of God. In Israel, as in all the ancient Orient, in contrast to classical Greece, God's word of utterance signified dynamic force, the power of change and transformation.<sup><a href="#ch4-nt5" id="ch4-ntr5">5</a></sup> As Roman says, “In Israel also the divine word had an express dynamic character and possessed a tremendous power.”<sup><a href="#ch4-nt6" id="ch4-ntr6">6</a></sup> Jeremiah compares the power of the Word with “a fire, a hammer that shatters the rocks” (Jer. 23:29). And Isaiah likens the power of God's Word directly to the power of generation: “For as the rain and the snow come down from heaven and return not thither but water the earth, making it bring forth and sprout, giving seed to the sower and bread to the eater, so shall my word be that goes forth from my mouth; it shall not return to me empty, but it shall accomplish that which I purpose, and prosper in the thing for which I sent it” (Isa. 55:10-11).</p>
<p class="indent">Thus, to the Hebraic mind, Christ as the Word of God was not a form or structure but the dynamic force that changes and produces new life and new possibilities. The Word, which in Greek thought is analogous to Reason, <a id="page_65"/>is in the Hebrew mind almost identical with the Deed of God.<sup><a href="#ch4-nt7" id="ch4-ntr7">7</a></sup> Moreover, in the Fourth Gospel the Greek word <i>logos</i>, while retaining its classical Greek connotation, has acquired the meaning of the Hebrew word, <i>dabhar</i>. In other words, at the beginning of the Fourth Gospel “the Word” means primarily the power of creativity rather than a form of structure.</p>
<p class="indent">There is a close relationship between the first five verses of the Fourth Gospel and the first five verses of Genesis. Both are cosmogonies: Both treat the story of creation, but from different perspectives.<sup><a href="#ch4-nt8" id="ch4-ntr8">8</a></sup> Genesis narrates the creation in detail in order to emphasize that God is the creator. The Fourth Gospel summarizes the process of creation for the purpose of emphasizing that Christ is the Word. But the Fourth Gospel also explicitly states that the Word is the basis of God's creativity: “All things were made through him, and without him was not anything made that was made” (John 1:3). Certainly those words affirm that the Word is the creative power of God, and the next verse reaffirms it: “In him was life, and the life was the light of man” (John 1:4). “In him was life” can also be translated as “In the Word was life.”<sup><a href="#ch4-nt9" id="ch4-ntr9">9</a></sup> Of course, life and light are the most common metaphors of creative power to be found in nature. In the Old Testament they are considered the essential forces of creation and preservation: God gives life (Ezek. 37:1-14; Dan. 12:2), which is the source of light (Ps. 119:130). Today the formula is reversed: Life is sustained by light, which is the basis of energy. In either formulation Christ as the Word is to be understood as the energy that is the basis of creation and re-creation.</p>
<p class="indent">The Word that becomes the power of creative process is also the wisdom of God. In Proverbs 8:22-31 wisdom is personified and becomes God's instrument and architect in creation, bringing salvation to humankind. This idea undergoes further elaboration, and wisdom and Torah become one in the creative process. “It becomes a commonplace of rabbinic Judaism that Wisdom and Torah were one and the same, and therefore Torah was the pre-existent instrument of creation, without which nothing was made that was made; indeed, all that was made was created for the sake of the Torah.”<sup><a href="#ch4-nt10" id="ch4-ntr10">10</a></sup> Christ is “the image of the invisible God, the firstborn of all creation; for in him were all things created…. All things have been created through him and unto him” (Col. 1:117). Here Christ, “the image of the invisible God,” is identified with the rabbinic definition of wisdom: Each is the focal point of creative process.<sup><a href="#ch4-nt11" id="ch4-ntr11">11</a></sup> Thus wisdom (<i>sophia</i>), like the word (<i>dabhar</i>), signifies the creative activity of God. The creator, the source of creation, is the background of wisdom, and wisdom, or the Word, is the foreground of the creator. They are mutually interdependent in the process of creation and redemption. A similar idea occurs in the Mahayana Buddhist tradition, especially in <i>Prajnāpāramitā-Sutra</i>, in which wisdom, or <i>prajnā</i>, is united with <i>sūnyatā</i>, or nonbeing, as the source of creation. <i>Prajnā</i>, which is often translated as “transcendental wisdom” or “divine wisdom,” is a counterpart of <i>sūnyatā</i>, or “emptiness.” Suzuki says, “It is the <i>Prajnā</i> that sees into all implications of Emptiness [non-being].”<sup><a href="#ch4-nt12" id="ch4-ntr12">12</a></sup> Like <i>prajnā</i>, <a id="page_66"/>Christ as wisdom represents the foreground of divine creativity, that is the light and life of the world.</p>
<p class="subhead"><b>CHRIST AS THE LIGHT</b></p>
<p class="indent">If we believe not only that Christ as Word or wisdom is “the first-born of all creation” but that “all things are created through him,” he must be the basis for every creative process, including light and darkness, life and death. In him nothing is separated, whether good or evil. We notice, however, especially in the Fourth Gospel and in apocalyptic writings, that Christ as the symbol of light and life is in conflict with darkness and death. Even though nothing, including darkness and death, can be separated from God's love that is in Christ, these writings apparently exclude darkness and death from the realm of his redemptive love. But as we have seen, absolute monotheism renders this antithesis incidental and superficial. The conflict between light and darkness or between life and death, like all other conflicts, is not ultimate. It is not essential but existential. To define these conflicts as essential presupposes an erroneous dualism.</p>
<p class="indent">Christ as the Word or the core of creative process is the solution to the existential problem, the problem of estrangement or sin. Christ as the Word is God in existence, as differentiated from God in essence. Since Christ is God in existence, that is, God in manifestation, he is conditionally limited. Brunner says, “God [God as creator, or in essence] is present where Jesus Christ is not present with His Light and Life, in the darkness, as the God of wrath. Thus there are works of God which as such are precisely not works of the Son.”<sup><a href="#ch4-nt13" id="ch4-ntr13">13</a></sup> Brunner is partly right, but we may question his saying that Christ is not present in the darkness. Christ as light cannot be excluded from the darkness, because light cannot exist without darkness nor darkness without light. To exclude Christ from the darkness is in fact to exclude him from light also. Because Christ subjected himself to the condition of existence, the darkness must also be in his light. Conversely, Christ as light enters into our darkness.</p>
<p class="indent">The relationship between Christ as light and life and the world as darkness and death can be illustrated by the <i>Tai chi t'u</i>, the diagram of the Great Ultimate in the <i>I ching</i>. The diagram consists of interlocked but differentiated <i>yin</i> (darkness) and <i>yang</i> (light). It is important to notice, however, that the <i>yin</i> portion of the diagram contains a <i>yang</i>, or light, dot, and the <i>yang</i> portion contains a <i>yin</i> dot. Christ as light, or <i>yang</i>, is not entirely exclusive of <i>yin</i> or darkness, and the world as <i>yin</i>, or darkness, is not entirely exclusive of <i>yang</i> or light. The expansion of light (<i>yang</i>) in darkness (<i>yin</i>) is a metaphor of the process of redemption or the growth of Christ-consciousness in us. Redemption, which is Christ, grows within us just as we grow within Christ's redemptive work, which is part of his creative work. Tillich's definition of Christ as the solution to the problem of existential estrangement, or sin, is valid and useful.</p>
<a id="page_67"/>
<p class="subhead"><b>CHRIST AS THE SAVIOR</b></p>
<p class="indent">Redemption, or salvation, presupposes the existential estrangement called sin. However we symbolize the concept of sin, we must remember that it is one of the possible relationships between creator and creature, or between the change and that which changes. The idea of existential estrangement resembles the Buddhist idea of <i>dukkha. Dukkha</i> is usually translated as “suffering,” but the Word is better translated as “existential estrangement.” The Pali word <i>dukkha</i> refers literally to an axle that is off-center with respect to its wheel or to a bone that has slipped out of its socket.<sup><a href="#ch4-nt14" id="ch4-ntr14">14</a></sup> Therefore <i>dukkha</i> implies an existential estrangement, an estrangement of relationship. Since life in a state of <i>dukkha</i>, or distorted relationship, is in constant motion and process, it expresses itself as pain and suffering, just as a leg whose tibia has slipped out of its socket is painful when it moves. That is why the life of sin is a life of suffering. Moreover, this existential estrangement disrupts the natural process of creativity in the world. When the wheel is out of alignment with its axis, it turns with difficulty or not at all.</p>
<p class="indent">By sin, or existential estrangement, the normal activity of God is disrupted and the harmony between creator and creature or between the change and that which changes is upset. Sin is the disruption of changing process and becoming. Sin is nothing but humanity's desire to <i>be</i> rather than to <i>become;</i> it is our unwillingness to change. This desire to <i>be</i> is one of the strongest inclinations of all creatures. It is expressed as nostalgia, which is usually defined as longing for the past but might be more accurately defined as futile unwillingness to change. We have no choice but to change. We are sojourners and pilgrims toward the never attained “not yet.” In the never-ending process of change we as creatures are born and die, grow and decay. The desire to <i>be</i>—to remain unchanged in the moving stream of life—is the existential estrangement, or sin. To overcome this desire to <i>be</i>—this clutch at stasis—is the goal or salvation. Thus the work of salvation is the restoration of normal creativity.</p>
<p class="indent">Salvation, then, means to follow the way of change without nostalgia. When Jesus said, “I am the Way,” he was referring to the way of change. By calling us to him, Jesus calls us to <i>be</i> one with the change, which is the source of all changes. To those who want to be, or to remain, Jesus said, “Follow me,” which is the core of his message. “Follow me” is Christ's unconditional command. One cannot look back. One cannot even go back to bury one's father. Jesus said, “Follow me, and leave the dead to bury their own dead” (Matt. 8:22). Jesus is the way of change, which is directed to the new creation. To be in the way of change, that is, in Christ, we must give up trying to establish our security on <i>be</i>ing. We must be ready always to become and to change in the direction that Jesus leads. We must not ask: “Are you running with me, Jesus?” but rather: “Am I running with <a id="page_68"/>you, Jesus?” Karl Barth defines Christ as the archetype of a person to become the model of what a person should be. Jesus said, “I am the Way,” the way of truth and change, and because he is our way, he calls us to follow. He is <i>yang</i> and we are <i>yin</i>. It is <i>yang</i>'s function to act and initiate and <i>yin</i>'s to respond and follow. Christ is creative because of <i>yang</i>; we must be receptive because of <i>yin</i>. Our only proper action, as <i>yin</i>, is to respond.</p>
<p class="indent">By our response, however, we become creative, because <i>yin</i> becomes <i>yang</i> by response and <i>yang</i> becomes <i>yin</i> by creation. Thus we become active by our inaction, creative by our response, and joyful by our suffering. It is a paradox of Christian experience. As Paul says, “We are treated as impostors, and yet are true; as unknown, and yet well known; as dying, and behold we live; as punished, and yet not killed; as sorrowful, yet always rejoicing; as poor, yet making many rich; as having nothing, and yet possessing everything” (2 Cor. 6:8-10). This idea is also expressed in the <i>Tao te ching</i>, the Taoist Scripture, which says, “The Way is gained by daily loss, loss upon loss until at last comes rest. By letting go, it all gets done; the world is won by those who let it go! But when you try and try, the world is then beyond the winning.”<sup><a href="#ch4-nt15" id="ch4-ntr15">15</a></sup> The way of <i>yin</i> is to gain by losing itself, or, in Paul's words, “It is no longer I who live, but Christ who lives in me” (Gal. 2:2). By responding to Christ's call to follow him, we cause him to act in us, as <i>yang</i> acts in <i>yin</i>. That is how “by letting go, it all gets done.” The change changes us. Or, in other words, God rules us.</p>
<p class="indent">By letting go, our way becomes his way and his way becomes ours. That is the secret of the way of change, the <i>tao</i>. Christ triumphed by loss of self. By enduring total defeat in crucifixion, he gained complete victory in resurrection. To give in full is to receive in full. Certainly receiving is giving and giving is receiving. Lao Tzu says, “The movement of the way is a return; in weakness lies its strength.”<sup><a href="#ch4-nt16" id="ch4-ntr16">16</a></sup> And Jesus’ teaching that the last shall be first and the exalted shall be humbled is identical in meaning. All phenomena, upon reaching their ultimate, must revert toward their antitheses. At noon the day begins to wane; at midnight night begins to lighten and day to dawn. By letting go of our <i>be</i>ing—of what we <i>are</i> at some finite moment—we become one with the way of change and transformation, and that is the way of salvation.</p>
<p class="indent">To be saved means to be part of the process of change and transformation brought about by the power of the change. Salvation is the harmony between the change and the changing or between the creator and the creature. It is like the harmony of <i>yin</i> and <i>yang</i>. Christ died not to anguish the world but to reconcile it to its creator. As Paul said, “God was in Christ reconciling the world to himself, not counting their trespasses against them, and entrusting to us the message of reconciliation” (2 Cor. 5:19). Salvation does not mean the subjugation of the world by the divine. Rather it means the harmonization of the world with the way of God's creative process of change. It is the process of reconciliation between creator and creature or between the change and the changing world. It is the harmony of <i>yin</i> and <a id="page_69"/><i>yang</i> which makes all things in peace. Thus to be saved means to be in harmony with the principle of change, which by the process of creation makes all things.</p>
<p class="indent">To be in harmony with changing process means to change. Therefore, as Paul said, “If anyone is in Christ, he is a new creation; the old has passed away, behold the new has come” (2 Cor. 5:17). The new creation Paul speaks of is new to the creature, but to the creator it is simply a renewal of what has already been. The new, or renewed, creation is essentially the same but existentially different from the old creation. The process of divine creativity, then, is a process of constant renewal of what has already been. That is what Ecclesiastes meant by saying, “There is nothing new under the sun.” Things new to us are not new to the creator. Divine creativity, which is perfectly manifested in Christ, is the power of renewal through the constant interplay of <i>yin</i> and <i>yang</i>. This interplay makes renewal possible, and renewal makes creativity possible.</p>
<p class="indent">In the Book of Changes there are sixty-four archetypes that are continually renewed to create new existences. They are essentially unchanging, even though they are manifest as many different forms in existence. Thus the change does not create anything really new but renews the old. In this renewing process, that is, the creative process, new existences are born of already existing essences. Creativity, in this sense, is never a progress toward novelty. As the Great Commentary says, “Change and transformation are images of progress and regression.”<sup><a href="#ch4-nt17" id="ch4-ntr17">17</a></sup> Advance necessarily leads to retrogression. As <i>yin</i> grows, <i>yang</i> decays; as <i>yang</i> grows, <i>yin</i> decays. Nothing can progress or develop indefinitely. A belief in infinite progression in history is contrary to the cyclic movement of time described in the <i>I ching</i>. In the world of relativity and change we cannot claim that history moves always and only forward.</p>
<p class="indent">In fact, salvation history includes both progression and retrogression. The end of time, or <i>eschaton</i>, must not be understood as the ultimate termination of history. <i>Eschaton</i> is the end of the old as well as the beginning of the new, that is, the renewal of the old. As Jacob says, “Eschatology is a return to the beginning; but with something additional which was absent at the first creation.”<sup><a href="#ch4-nt18" id="ch4-ntr18">18</a></sup> Every day is the end of time and beginning of renewed time. The end of the world in the New Testament does not mean the absolute end but the end of the old and the beginning of the new world through the power of renewal. It is the coming to an end of a cosmic span of change. Everything has its own span of change. When the span ends it is renewed. That is why we see in the ending of the world the images of a new heaven and a new earth. When the Last Judgment is over, the new heaven and new earth appear. “Then I saw a new heaven and a new earth; for the first heaven and the first earth have passed away, and the sea was no more. And I saw the holy city, the new Jerusalem, coming down out of heaven from God, prepared as a bride adorned for her husband” (Rev. 21:1-2). The new heaven and new earth and the new Jerusalem are symbols <a id="page_70"/>of renewal. They are not essentially new but are renewals of the old heaven and earth. Thus, in essence, ending is the beginning of renewal. In this process of renewal, that is, in the process of salvation, the world is in constant change and transformation. Christ shows us the way to be in this process of renewal and becoming, for he is the pioneer of our salvation.</p>
<p class="indent">Christ is the pioneer of our salvation, because he is “the first born of all creation.” He is the origin of creative process toward which salvation history moves, for salvation is a process of returning to the origin of creation. “He is before all things, and in him all things hold together” (Col. 1:17). In other words, he is the center and origin of all creative processes and of all their manifestations. This center is the seed or origin of all creation.</p>
<p class="subhead"><b>CHRIST AS THE CENTER OF THE CREATIVE PROCESS</b></p>
<p class="indent">Christ as the center of the cosmic process is analogous to the Indian symbol of the cosmic center, the mythic Mt. Meru, which is also the symbol of Brahman, Hinduism's name for ultimate reality. Here Christ, as the symbol of the cosmic center, is parallel to Brahman, the Hindu notion of the ultimate reality, who also symbolizes the cosmic center. He is the center of every creative process, for the cosmic center includes all macrocosmic as well as microcosmic centers. Therefore the cosmic Christ also represents the center of the human soul and the axis of human life. As St. John of the Cross says, “The center of the soul is God.”<sup><a href="#ch4-nt19" id="ch4-ntr19">19</a></sup> Just as a wheel's axis is empty, Christ as the center of existence is empty; he is <i>śūnyatā</i>, or nonbeing, which is the origin of all creative becoming.</p>
<p class="indent">Christ is the divine reality. In him, that is, in the core of every creative process, all distinctions disappear. In Christ object and subject, inner and outer, good and evil become indistinguishable. In the center of the changing process, which is Christ, not only <i>all</i> things but all times—past, present, and future—come together. This undifferentiated time is eternity, in which the beginning is also the ending and the ending is also the beginning. Therefore to be in the center of changing process is also to be in eternity. By saying, “I am the Alpha and Omega, the first and the last, the beginning and the end” (Rev. 22:13), Jesus meant that he is eternal. In the primordial center he is one “who is and who was and who is to come” (Rev. 1:8). He is then the symbol of eternal change, which is the perfect manifestation of change itself.</p>
<p class="indent">Christ as the symbol of the concentric point of every creative process embraces all dimensions of time and space. To return to this primordial origin is in a way to be in union with the eternal reality. In it humanity is free from the illusion of <i>māyā</i> and the bondage of sin. For the individual who has “found”—or understood—the center, the wheel of life stops turning. At the center of existence humanity is totally detached from the phenomenal world, yet totally attached to the real world. Thus to be in Christ means to be simultaneously attached and detached. Paul says that in Christ <a id="page_71"/>we are not of the world but in the world. Because Christ occupies the center of creative process, where <i>māyā</i> and sin do not exist, salvation is in him.</p>
<p class="subhead"><b>DIVINITY AND HUMANITY OF CHRIST</b></p>
<p class="indent">As the primordial origin of the creative process, Christ is also both divine and human. In this center the distinction between man and God disappears. This continuum between humanity and divinity is the real meaning of incarnation. Because he occupies the center of the cosmic process, the incarnate Christ becomes the focus of the universal aspiration and goal of the whole world. The existence and destiny of everything in the world, personal or impersonal, has its source in Christ. Christ as the primordial center of the creative process is the perfect incarnation of the infinite in the finite world; he is human and divine in the fullest sense. He is fully divine because he is fully human. He is a perfect man because he is a perfect God. His human perfection is manifested in his friendship and brotherhood to all humankind. As a true brother he shows us the way to the Father, and as a true friend he lays down his life for us. He is a man for others, standing in the place where others must stand but cannot. He is also divine in a perfect sense because he occupies the center of divine creativity. In him the power of the change is manifested perfectly. He is in perfect harmony with the process of the change. Because of this perfect harmony, his will and the will of God are one and inseparable. That is what Jesus meant by saying “Believe in me that I am in the Father and the Father in me” John 1:11).</p>
<p class="indent">The relationship between Christ's divinity and humanity is like the relationship between <i>yin</i> and <i>yang</i>. Just as <i>yang</i> cannot exist without <i>yin</i> nor <i>yin</i> without <i>yang</i>, the humanity of Jesus cannot exist without the divinity of Christ nor the divinity of Christ without the humanity of Jesus. “In him God is not separated from man nor man from God. They are in complementary relationship. He is God because of man: He is man because of God.”<sup><a href="#ch4-nt20" id="ch4-ntr20">20</a></sup> In Jesus as the Christ man and God are in perfect harmony. Jesus’ divinity does not preclude his humanity but rather presupposes it, just as <i>yang</i> presupposes the existence of <i>yin</i>. Furthermore, perfect humility presupposes perfect divinity. In his perfect complementarity of divine and human, or of the change and the changing, he is both perfect man and perfect God. Being the symbol of perfect harmony between the change and the changing, Jesus Christ is the ultimate reality of change and transformation.</p>
<p class="indent">As the basis of creativity Christ is also the perfect symbol of the divine nature. He is the perfect symbol of the creator who is the eternal subject, unknown to us. He transcends the division between subject and object and all other categorizations by which we express our understanding of reality. God as creator is the background of all process and becoming. Christ as the primordial origin of creative energy becomes the mediator between God <a id="page_72"/>as creator and humanity as creature. Christ as a mediator functions symbolically. “Thus the symbol functions as a mediator which can transform subject to object. However, this does not mean that God is no longer revealing Himself as the Subject. He is the Subject of us always, but He is seen as the object of our knowledge when we see Him through the symbol.”<sup><a href="#ch4-nt21" id="ch4-ntr21">21</a></sup></p>
<p class="indent">Christ is a perfect symbol, not only because we see God in him perfectly, but because we see ourselves in him perfectly. In him “Very God does indeed energize in Very Man.”<sup><a href="#ch4-nt22" id="ch4-ntr22">22</a></sup> Because we see ourselves perfectly in him, he also becomes the perfect symbol of humanity. We become subjects of God by participating in this perfect symbol of God and man. As a wheel's axis is empty, Christ's mind is still, reflecting like a mirror every impulse of the change. His heart is unadulterated and his attitude unadorned. He is like the <i>p'o</i>, the virgin block of wood untouched by human artifice, which is the Taoist symbol of perfection. He is like the children whom he described as “belonging to the kingdom of heaven.” His purity of heart, sincerity of conviction, simplicity of life, and conformability with change are attributes of the perfect symbol of both creator and creature. Christ is present to us as a perfect symbol of the reality of God's creativity and humanity's response to it; he is <i>yang</i> to humanity's <i>yin</i> and <i>yin</i> to the creator's <i>yang</i>. Because everything owes its existence and renewal to the continual interaction of <i>yang</i> and <i>yin</i>, Jesus is the perfect symbol of “both-and,” which is the normative description of ultimate reality.</p>
<p class="subhead"><b>THE CRUCIFIXION AND RESURRECTION OF CHRIST</b></p>
<p class="indent">The most vivid reminders of Christ's living presence as the perfect symbol of change are life and death. The perfect symbol of death is Jesus’ crucifixion, because Jesus is the perfect symbol of every process, including death and life. The perfect symbol of life is the renewal of life in Jesus’ resurrection. Just as death presupposes life, crucifixion presupposes resurrection. In early Indian scriptures Shiva appeared as the destroyer of life, but later he acquired regenerative powers as well, because renewal presupposes the destruction of the old. Like Shiva, Christ symbolizes both the destruction and the renewal of life. Christ's death is not symbolic of the total annihilation of life but of its existential negation. Thus the essential nature, or archetype, of humanity is not thereby extinguished. Christ's resurrection is then the renewal of the archetype in a form existentially different but essentially the same. Since crucifixion and resurrection act upon the same essence, or archetype, they are existentially not contradictory but ultimately complementary. Christ's resurrection is not the conquest of death but the fulfillment of life, and his crucifixion was necessary for that fulfillment. What is to be renewed must first die. Thus Jesus as the perfect symbol of the change unites both decay and growth or death and resurrection in the process of constant change and transformation.</p>
<p class="indent">Crucifixion and resurrection represent the matrices of all changes and <a id="page_73"/>transformations in the world. They symbolize winter and spring, evening and morning, rest and motion. Crucifixion and resurrection are <i>yin</i> and <i>yang</i>, the gateways to all changes, and they occur in all things, because all things change. If crucifixion and resurrection are common to all things, how are Jesus’ crucifixion and resurrection unique?</p>
<p class="indent">Death on the cross was not uncommon in the Roman world, nor was the belief in resurrection throughout the Near and Middle East.<sup><a href="#ch4-nt23" id="ch4-ntr23">23</a></sup> Jesus’ followers fully expected to die and be raised again to life as he had been. Jesus’ crucifixion and resurrection are unique, not because they happened to him, but because they became the primordial symbol of all changing. They also became the primordial symbols of Christian life. As Paul says, “For if we have been united with him in a death like his, we shall certainly be united with him in a resurrection like his” (Rom. 6:5), and, “The death he died he died to sin, once for all, but the life he lives he lives to God. So you also must consider yourselves dead to sin and alive to God in Christ Jesus” (Rom. 6:11). Jesus’ resurrection became the primordial symbol of Christianity's renewing power engendering a saving process that consists in a return to original creativity. As Moltmann says, “Christianity stands or falls with the reality of the raising of Jesus from the dead by God. In the New Testament there is no faith that does not start a priori with the resurrection of Jesus.”<sup><a href="#ch4-nt24" id="ch4-ntr24">24</a></sup> Jesus’ resurrection is distinguished from all other forms of life renewal by its primordial symbolism, through which everyone can experience the renewal of life and enter into the creative process. In it we may take part in the renewing process of change and understand the eternal change in the midst of a changing world.</p>
<p class="subhead"><b>NOTES</b></p>
<p class="noteitem"><a href="#ch4-ntr1" id="ch4-nt1">1</a>. Paul Tillich, <i>Systematic Theology</i> (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1957), vol. 2, Existence and the Christ, p. 146.</p>
<p class="noteitem"><a href="#ch4-ntr2" id="ch4-nt2">2</a>. This concept of salvation as the recapitulation of original creation was originally proposed by Irenaeus and came to be accepted widely, especially by the so-called Lundensian theology.</p>
<p class="noteitem"><a href="#ch4-ntr3" id="ch4-nt3">3</a>. Emil Brunner, <i>The Christian Doctrine of God</i>, trans. Olive Wyon (Philadelphia: Westminster Press, 1950), p. 217.</p>
<p class="noteitem"><a href="#ch4-ntr4" id="ch4-nt4">4</a>. Ibid., p. 232.</p>
<p class="noteitem"><a href="#ch4-ntr5" id="ch4-nt5">5</a>. Thorlief Boman, <i>Hebrew Thought Compared with Greek</i>, trans. Jules Moreau (New York: Norton, 1970; and London: SCM Press, 1960), p. 58.</p>
<p class="noteitem"><a href="#ch4-ntr6" id="ch4-nt6">6</a>. Ibid., p. 60.</p>
<p class="noteitem"><a href="#ch4-ntr7" id="ch4-nt7">7</a>. Ibid., p. 68.</p>
<p class="noteitem"><a href="#ch4-ntr8" id="ch4-nt8">8</a>. John's prologue, especially his use of a cosmogony as the basis of his message of salvation, is often thought to reflect the Hellenistic ideas as expressed in the <i>Hermetica</i>. This does not, however, eliminate the fundamental connection between the Old and New Testament meanings of “the Word.”</p>
<p class="noteitem"><a href="#ch4-ntr9" id="ch4-nt9">9</a>. C. K. Barrett, <i>The Gospel According to St. John: An Introduction with Commentary and Notes on the Greek Text</i> (Philadelphia: Westminster John Knox, 1978; and London: SPCK, 1960), p. 131.</p>
<a id="page_74"/>
<p class="noteitem1"><a href="#ch4-ntr10" id="ch4-nt10">10</a>. Alan Richardson, <i>An Introduction to the Theology of the New Testament</i> (New York: Harper and Row, 1958), p. 156.</p>
<p class="noteitem1"><a href="#ch4-ntr11" id="ch4-nt11">11</a>. The phrase “image of God” is used in the Greek Old Testament to refer to the divine wisdom (Wisd. 7:26). See also S. Radhakrishnan, <i>Religion in a Changing World</i> (London: George Allen and Unwin, 1967), p. 107.</p>
<p class="noteitem1"><a href="#ch4-ntr12" id="ch4-nt12">12</a>. D. T. Suzuki, <i>Essays in Zen Buddhism</i>, Third Series (London: Rider and Co., 1958), p. 254.</p>
<p class="noteitem1"><a href="#ch4-ntr13" id="ch4-nt13">13</a>. Brunner, <i>Christian Doctrine of God</i>, p. 232.</p>
<p class="noteitem1"><a href="#ch4-ntr14" id="ch4-nt14">14</a>. See Huston Smith, <i>The Religions of Man</i> (New York: Harper and Row, 1958), p. 99.</p>
<p class="noteitem1"><a href="#ch4-ntr15" id="ch4-nt15">15</a>. <i>Tao te ching</i>, trans. by R. S. Blakney (New York: New American Library, 1955), ch. 48.</p>
<p class="noteitem1"><a href="#ch4-ntr16" id="ch4-nt16">16</a>. Ibid., ch. 40.</p>
<p class="noteitem1"><a href="#ch4-ntr17" id="ch4-nt17">17</a>. <i>Ta chuan</i>, sec. 1, ch. 2.</p>
<p class="noteitem1"><a href="#ch4-ntr18" id="ch4-nt18">18</a>. Edmond Jacob, <i>Theology of the Old Testament</i> (New York: Harper and Brothers, 1958), p. 12.</p>
<p class="noteitem1"><a href="#ch4-ntr19" id="ch4-nt19">19</a>. R. C. Zaehner, <i>Mysticism Sacred and Profane</i> (New York and London: Oxford University Press, 1961), p. 137.</p>
<p class="noteitem1"><a href="#ch4-ntr20" id="ch4-nt20">20</a>. J. Y. Lee, “The Yin-Yang of Thinking,” <i>International Review of Mission</i>, July 1971, p. 370.</p>
<p class="noteitem1"><a href="#ch4-ntr21" id="ch4-nt21">21</a>. J. Y. Lee, <i>The I: A Christian Concept of Man</i> (New York: Philosophical Library, 1971), p. 71.</p>
<p class="noteitem1"><a href="#ch4-ntr22" id="ch4-nt22">22</a>. Norman Pittenger, <i>God in Process</i> (London: SCM, 1967), p. 70.</p>
<p class="noteitem1"><a href="#ch4-ntr23" id="ch4-nt23">23</a>. Osiris in Egypt, Tammuz in Babylon, and Attis in Asia Minor exemplify ancient Near Eastern beliefs in resurrection. Even though the manner of resurrection differs in different traditions, we can say that the idea of resurrection was widely held in the New Testament time. There is some truth in what Moltmann said: “Christianity differs from the Hellenistic view for it participates not in perfect resurrection but in the present or the future hope” (Jürgen Moltmann, <i>Theology of Hope</i>, New York: Harper and Row, 1967, p. 161).</p>
<p class="noteitem1"><a href="#ch4-ntr24" id="ch4-nt24">24</a>. Jürgen Moltmann, <i>Theology of Hope</i>, p. 165.</p>
</div>
</body>
</html>