<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>conributors</title>
<link href="ebook_style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
<meta content="urn:uuid:e628635c-8169-4333-a0b2-b0f205aae46e" name="Adept.expected.resource"/>
</head>
<body>
<div>
<a id="page_265"/>
<h2 class="chaptertitle1"><big>C</big>ontributors</h2>
<p class="indent"><b>Michael Amaladoss,</b> an Indian Jesuit, is currently a member of the Jesuit General Council in Rome. Previously he has taught systematic theology at Vidyajyoti Institute of Religious Studies, Delhi, India. He has published several articles on theology of mission, Indian theology and hermeneutics. He is the author of <i>Mission Today: Reflections From an Ignatian Perspective</i> (Rome: Centrum Ignatianum Spiritualitatis, 1988) and <i>Making All Things New: Dialogue, Pluralism and Evangelization in Asia</i> (Maryknoll, N.Y.: Orbis Books, 1990).</p>
<p class="indent"><b>Byung Mu Ahn,</b> Korean New Testament professor and activist, is a pioneer of Korean <i>minjung</i> theology. He has published several articles explicating the nuances of <i>minjung</i> theology and biblical interpretation in international journals. His primary and ground-breaking expositions have been in reading St. Mark's gospel from the perspective of <i>minjung</i>. His rereading of <i>ochlos</i> (crowd) from the perspective of <i>minjung</i> has been widely referred to in various theological writings.</p>
<p class="indent"><b>Chung Hyun Kyung</b> is Korean and teaches systematic theology at Ewha University, Seoul. She is one of the second generation of <i>minjung</i> theologians. She attracted the attention of the ecumenical world at the 1991 Canberra Assembly of the World Council of Churches with her bold and innovative rereading of the assembly theme. She is actively involved with many women's groups and has written extensively about their issues. Her recent publications include <i>Struggle To Be the Sun Again: Introducing Asian Women's Theology</i> (Maryknoll, N.Y.: Orbis Books, 1990; and London: SCM Press, 1992). Her autobiographical-theological piece, “Following Naked Dancing and Long Dreaming,” in <i>Inheriting Our Mother's Gardens: Feminist Theology in Third World Perspective</i>, ed. Letty M. Russell, et al. (Philadelphia: Westminster Press, 1988) is one of the bravest and most imaginative of theological writings by an Asian woman.</p>
<p class="indent"><b>Virginia Fabella</b> is from the Philippines and belongs to the order of Maryknoll Sisters. She is the Asia Co-ordinator for the Ecumenical Association of Third World Theologians (EATWOT). Besides editing a number of their collections of conference papers, she herself has contributed significantly toward Asian ways of doing theology. <i>In God's Image</i>, a quarterly published by the Women's Resource Centre for Culture and Theology, Hong Kong, carries many of her articles.</p>
<p class="indent"><b>Jung Young Lee</b> comes from Korea and is currently chairperson of the <a id="page_266"/>Department of Religious Studies at the University of North Dakota. He sees one of his prime tasks as interpreting Eastern thinking to the West. Two of his books, <i>The Theology of Change</i> (Maryknoll, N.Y.: Orbis Books, 1979) and a volume he edited with José Míguez Bonino, et al., <i>An Emerging Theology in Western Perspective: Commentary on Korean Minjung Theology</i> (Mystic, Conn.: Twenty-Third Publications, 1988), are demonstrations of his efforts.</p>
<p class="indent"><b>Sebastian Kappen</b> is closely associated with activist groups throughout India and is at present deeply involved in ecological issues. His significant contributions toward Christianity in relation to Marxism and to social praxis through his publications, lectures and personal involvement have influenced many. Currently he is working on a theology of liberation from the perspective of Indian subaltern religious traditions. Among his many books are: <i>Jesus and Freedom</i> (Maryknoll, N.Y.: Orbis Books, 1977), <i>Marxism and Atheism, Liberation Theology and Marxism</i> (Puntamba, India: Asha Kendra, 1986). Kappen belongs to the Society of Jesus.</p>
<p class="indent"><b>Kosuke Koyama</b> is Professor of Ecumenics and World Christianity at Union Theological Seminary, New York. His experience of working as a Japanese missionary in Thailand prompted in him the need to work out a contextual theology that would avoid using abstract ideas and speak to the everyday experience of the people with whom he was working, with their stomach aches and leaking roofs. The result was the highly entertaining yet eminently profound <i>Waterbuffalo Theology</i>. Since then he has published a number of articles and books on Asian Christian theology. Among his most recent books is <i>Mount Fuji and Mount Sinai</i>, an absorbing investigation of the relationship between East and West, leading to a theology of the cross against the menace of the nuclear threat.</p>
<p class="indent"><b>Alexander Malik</b> is Bishop of the Lahore Diocese of the Church of Pakistan and is considered one of the eminent leaders of his community.</p>
<p class="indent"><b>Ovey N. Mohammed,</b> a Jesuit, is the Vice-President of Regis College of the Toronto School of Theology. His field of research and publication is theology of religions and interfaith hermeneutics. Two recent examples of his work are “Ignatian Spirituality and the <i>Bhagavad Gita,” Thought</i> (December 1987) and “Hinduism and Spirituality,” <i>The Way Supplement</i> (Summer 1990).</p>
<p class="indent"><b>Salvador T. Martinez</b> is Secretary for Theological Concerns for the Christian Conference of Asia. Formerly he was Dean of the College of Arts and Sciences, Silliman University, Dumaguete City, Philippines. His major theological interests are in the areas of Asian popular religiosity and Filipino theologies.</p>
<p class="indent"><b>Aloysius Pieris,</b> a Sri Lankan Jesuit, is Director of the Tulana Research Center, Kelaniya, Sri Lanka, which promotes Christian-Buddhist dialogue. He was the first among the Asian theologians to argue that Asian Christians should not only address the double reality of Asia—poverty and religious pluralism—but should respond to them together. This he describes as baptismal <a id="page_267"/>immersion in the Jordan of Asian religiosity and the cross of Asian poverty. He has written a number of articles explicating his thesis. His books include <i>An Asian Theology of Liberation</i> (Maryknoll, N.Y.: Orbis Books, 1988; and Edinburgh: T &amp; T Clark, 1988) and <i>Love Meets Wisdom: A Christian Experience of Buddhism</i> (Maryknoll, N.Y.: Orbis Books, 1988).</p>
<p class="indent"><b>Michael Rodrigo</b> was murdered by gunmen on October 11, 1987, when he was celebrating Mass at Suba Seth Gedera—a grassroots Christian-Buddhist dialogue center he started. His work with the villagers had made him unpopular among the rich and privileged, and he and his center were often severely threatened. The question Michael Rodrigo and his co-workers agonized over was whether to stay on or to leave the people at the mercy of the exploiters. It was at this Mass, when Michael and his co-workers, weighing the pros and cons, eventually decided to carry on with their work, that he was felled by an assassin's bullet. In his death the inarticulate and the powerless lost an effective voice. For a selection of his writings, see <i>Logos</i> 27, 3 and 4 (1988), a journal published by the Center for Society and Religion, 281 Dean's Road, Colombo 10, Sri Lanka.</p>
<p class="indent"><b>Stanley Samartha</b> was the first Director of the Dialogue Programme of the World Council of Churches, Geneva. He is currently Visiting Professor at the United Theological College, Bangalore, India. He was influential in helping ecumenical circles to rethink Christian attitudes toward people of other faiths. He has published extensively on interfaith issues. The title of his latest book is <i>One Christ—Many Religions: Toward a Revised Christology</i> (Maryknoll, N.Y.: Orbis Books, 1991).</p>
<p class="indent"><b>Choan-Seng Song</b> is Professor of Theology and Asian Cultures at the Pacific School of Religion, Berkeley, California. He has been a pioneer in advocating Asian ways of doing theology using Asian resources and insights. His booklet <i>The Tears of Lady Meng: A Parable of People's Political Theology</i> (Geneva: WCC, 1981) is required reading for those who are interested in such hermeneutical enterprises. His Orbis publications include <i>The Compassionate God</i> (1982), <i>Tell Us Our Names</i> (1984) and <i>Third-Eye Theology</i> (1979). His most recent book is <i>Jesus, the Crucified People</i> (New York: Crossroad Publishing Company, 1990). He is currently Dean of the Programme for the Theology and Cultures in Asia (PTCA)—a program set up to encourage Asians to use their histories, cultures, religions, social and political struggles as the data for doing theology.</p>
<p class="indent"><b>Seiichi Yagi</b> is Professor of Philosophical and Religious Thought at the University of Yokohama, Japan. He is also a New Testament scholar. In his teachings and publications he combines his primary interest in Christian-Buddhist dialogue with biblical theology. He has published extensively in Japanese on Christian-Buddhist dialogue issues. His open approach to Buddhism has made him popular among the adherents of that tradition.</p>
<a id="page_268"/>
</div>
</body>
</html>