<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>copyright</title>
<link href="ebook_style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
<meta content="urn:uuid:e628635c-8169-4333-a0b2-b0f205aae46e" name="Adept.expected.resource"/>
</head>
<body>
<div>
<a id="page_iv"/>
<p class="copyright">The Catholic Foreign Mission Society of America (Maryknoll) recruits and trains people for overseas missionary service. Through Orbis Books, Maryknoll aims to foster the international dialogue that is essential to mission. The books published, however, reflect the opinions of their authors and are not meant to represent the official position of the society.</p>
<p class="copyright1">Copyright © 1993 by R. S. Sugirtharajah</p>
<p class="copyright1">All rights reserved</p>
<p class="copyright1">Acknowledgment is gratefully extended for permission to reprint the following:</p>
<p class="copyright1">“The Crucified Christ Challenges Human Power” from <i>Your Kingdom Come: Mission Perspectives</i> by Kosuke Koyama, copyright 1990 and reprinted with permission of the World Council of Churches Publications, Geneva, Switzerland. “Confessing Christ in the Islamic Context” by Alexander J. Malik, “Jesus and People (Minjung)” by Byung Mu Ahn, “The Hope of Liberation Lessens Man's Inhumanity: A Contribution to Dialogue at Village Level” by Michael Rodrigo, and “Jesus Christ in Popular Piety in the Philippines” by Salvador T. Martinez, reprinted with permission of the Christian Conference of Asia, G/F, 2 Jordan Road, Kowloon, Hong Kong from <i>CTC Bulletin</i> 7 (1987). “Jesus and Krishna” by Ovey N. Mohammed (© 1990) and “Christ and Buddha” by Seiichi Yagi (© 1991) are reprinted with permission of the <i>Journal of Ecumenical Studies</i>, Temple University, Philadelphia PA 19122. “Oh, Jesus, Here with Us!” from <i>Jesus, the Crucified People</i>. Copyright © 1990 by C. S. Song. Reprinted by permission of The Crossroad Publishing Company.</p>
<p class="copyright1">Published by Orbis Books, Maryknoll, NY 10545<br/>Published in Britain by SCM Press Ltd, 26-30 Tottenham Road,<br/>London N1 4BZ</p>
<p class="copyright">Manufactured in the United States of America</p>
<p class="copyright2"><b>Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data</b></p>
<p class="copyright3">Asian faces of Jesus / edited by R. S. Sugirtharajah.</p>
<p class="copyright4">p.   cm.—(Faith and cultures series)</p>
<p class="copyright5">Includes bibliographical references</p>
<p class="copyright5">ISBN 0-88344-833-5 (pbk.)</p>
<p class="copyright5">1. Jesus Christ—History of doctrines—20th century. 2. Jesus Christ—Person and offices. 3. Asia—Religious life and customs.</p>
<p class="copyright6">I. Sugirtharajah, R. S. (Rasiah S.) II. Series.<br/>BT198.A845   1993</p>
<table cellpadding="0" cellspacing="0" class="tbc" width="100%">
<col width="65%"/>
<col width="35%"/>
<tr>
<td align="left">232′.095—dc20</td>
<td align="left">93-536</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td> </td>
<td align="left">   CIP</td>
</tr>
</table>
</div>
</body>
</html>