<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>epilogue</title>
<link href="ebook_style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
<meta content="urn:uuid:e628635c-8169-4333-a0b2-b0f205aae46e" name="Adept.expected.resource"/>
</head>
<body>
<div>
<a id="page_258"/>
<h2 class="chapternumber">Epilogue</h2>
<h2 class="chaptertitle"><big>R</big>econceiving <big>J</big>esus: <big>S</big>ome <big>C</big>ontinuing <big>C</big>oncerns</h2>
<p class="chapterauthor1">R. S. SUGIRTHARAJAH</p>
<p class="indent">Briefly, then, the following would be some of the christological concerns of Asian Christians as they continue to make sense of their lives and, in that process, make sense of Jesus.</p>
<p class="subhead"><b>THE ONE AND THE MANY</b></p>
<p class="indent">The first is a practical concern, and not one confronted only by Asian Christians but by Christians all over the world. How does one deal with the proliferation of images of Jesus? The spate of christological profiles, ranging from Jesus as pure consciousness to Jesus as a social activist, causes confusion and bewilderment among ordinary Christians as well as among trained theological practitioners. The temptation under this hermeneutical onslaught is to long for a wholesome, total and fixed portrayal of Jesus. The likelihood is that those who look for such christological comfort will be disappointed. The christological enterprise is an ongoing task. Cultures and contexts are not static entities; they constantly change and throw up warp and woof of political, social and religious strands in an ever-new fabric. As cultures evolve, as new contexts and experiences emerge, as new questions surface, so features and aspects of Jesus will continue to be discovered.</p>
<p class="indent">The multiplicity of new images of Jesus is often attributed to and blamed upon the overly enthusiastic response of Asian and Latin American and African theologians. But what is overlooked is that this proliferation of images is not due only to the vigorous and passionate response of Asian Christians and others engaged in contextual christologies, but is due also <a id="page_259"/>to the nature of the gospel narratives themselves, which lend themselves to a variety of expositions. It is possible from gospel records, depending on what text one chooses, to construct almost any picture of Jesus one wishes. For instance, a brewer can show Jesus supporting distilleries by citing Luke 7:33-34, or a social worker who wants to plan additional shelters for the homeless and outcasts of society can, from the same gospel, show Jesus as a homeless drifter (Luke 9:57-58).</p>
<p class="indent">The hermeneutical task then is to address the issue of a profusion of images of Jesus. The simplest and theologically safest option would be to echo the words of Thomas, “My mouth is utterly unable to say what you are like” (<i>Logion</i> 13), and to refuse to add to the existing accumulation of images. Another would be to choose one from among the many renderings and project this as the normative center from which to judge and evaluate other christological constructs. In other words, for the sake of maintaining theological law and order, choose one and help to establish some semblance of orthodoxy. The trouble with this method is that no image that is chosen will commend itself to all. Such a choice would be construed as one group of people trying to impose their own particular understanding of Jesus on others. More specifically, it would not only deny plural historical mediations of the Divine but would also deny that creative interaction of story, myth and legend which holds such promise of human enrichment.</p>
<p class="indent">But the most challenging approach would be to accept these multiple images as a gift, scrutinizing their diversity and probing their meaning, purpose and function, and above all, celebrating the gift. Rather, this approach would intensely analyze the current contexts in which the images are embodied. It would address contemporary situations, which constantly provide the raw material for Asians to shape their profiles. From among these accumulating images the task is not to identify those that represent correct christological formulations, as the old church councils used to do, but to look afresh at the contexts that bring forth these sketches of Jesus and to find appropriate ways to transform them.</p>
<p class="subhead"><b>COMMUNITIES AND COUNTER-COMMUNITY</b></p>
<p class="indent">Second, it has been fashionable among recent biblical scholars to project Jesus as the founder of a movement, a movement designed as a counter-community with its own identity and distinction. Gerd Theissen popularized this notion, and since then some Asian Christian thinkers have adopted the idea to illustrate the new identity of Christians. Such a notion of a counter-cultural community, although it has its value, may, if it is stretched too far, cause tension in Asian communities. On the one hand, it may provide a sense of liberation from conventional constraints imposed on people by some aspects of Asian culture. On the other, it has oppressive connotations, for it tacitly encourages Asian Christians to leave their own cultural heritage and join Christian communities whose lifestyle, organizational structure <a id="page_260"/>and worship largely imitate Western patterns. Thus, any christological formulations that tend to alienate people from their own cultural heritage should be discouraged; however, christologies that adduce mutual criticism, mutual learning and mutual well-being, both of humankind and of the ecological order, should be encouraged.</p>
<p class="subhead"><b>PURE GOSPEL AND PAGAN CULTURE</b></p>
<p class="indent">This leads to a third concern: the knotty problem of syncretism. Put simply, the issue is where to draw the line in using and applying local resources to fashion images of Jesus. The question is not new. It has plagued Christian interpreters ever since the gospel moved out of the village confines of Palestine and entered the urban environs of the Roman world and thence to other parts of the globe. There is no need to rehearse the arguments for and against syncretism. The anti-syncretistic lobby is based on two ideas. One is that there is a pure, unalloyed and unvarnished gospel that can be planted in any situation. The second is the notion that culture, especially the receiving one, is a static, finished product that is usually evil, and waiting to be purified. Both are based on false premises. First, the gospel narratives indicate that the gospel never existed in a pure state and its power is evident only when it is couched in the historical and cultural experience of a people. Second, cultures are constantly in a process of radical renewal and enrichment.</p>
<p class="indent">The whole debate about syncretism is a prime example of the hermeneutics of suspicion. When the bogey of syncretism is raised, by whom is it raised? Sometimes by Euro-American interpreters who are uneasy when Asians attempt anything. Sometimes it is raised by the Asian church hierarchy when ordinary people imaginatively mold a rich variety of local symbols to express their understanding of Jesus. Sometimes these ordinary people themselves resist the proposals of Asian theologians to use indigenous components which Asians feel they have left behind. Ultimately it boils down to questions like Who has the power to interpret? Who possesses the truth? What makes the gospel Christian?</p>
<p class="indent">What one needs to keep in mind is that Christian faith ultimately triumphed in its own environment, and not only because it had something special to offer or because it had superior answers to ultimate questions. It basically triumphed because of its ability to assimilate, accommodate, reshape and remold the elements that were prevalent in the surrounding culture. Its uniqueness was the new amalgam it created out of borrowings from adjacent cultures. Future understandings of Jesus should be bold enough to incorporate life-enhancing and affirming elements from within the culture that will make the face of Jesus more Asian than hitherto.</p>
<p class="subhead"><b>MESSAGE AND IMAGE</b></p>
<p class="indent">Fourth, one cannot talk about Jesus without invariably talking at the same time about his followers, or, more precisely, the Christian church. In <a id="page_261"/>other words, any Christ-talk is linked to Christian identity, and this identity is mediated through the prevailing patterns of the Christian church. Often within the church the figure of a Jesus who distanced himself from social realities and human problems and spoke condescendingly of the poor as objects of his mercy and compassion has replaced the Jesus who takes the side of the poor and champions their cause. It was this cause that led to his rejection, humiliation and, even more revealingly, to the scars and wounds on his body. Following Jesus inevitably involves a lifestyle that reflects his identification with people, his weakness and vulnerability. The real question then is if the structures and the hierarchies of Asian churches do reflect this vulnerability. No christological construct, however clever, will make any sense unless the church as Christ's body is willing to demonstrate this powerlessness. Any proclamation of Jesus’ powerlessness will be met with suspicion unless the Christian church in Asia is willing to exhibit the wounds and scars in her body. The true nature of Jesus will shine forth only when churches in Asia make the marks visible. Like Thomas of old, Asians would like to see the scars before they accept the presence of Jesus in their midst.</p>
<p class="subhead"><b>WHAT'S IN THE NAME?</b></p>
<p class="indent">At present there is a resurgence of religious fundamentalism, and its virulent impact is very much felt in Asia. This revivalism is not confined to one religion alone. It is prevalent among Hindus, Muslims, Sikhs, Buddhists and, of course, among Christians as well. The whole phenomenon is a curious mixture of religion, politics and culture. It uses the language of faith to legitimize radical reformist programs and appeals to a selective and arbitrarily interpreted past tradition and text to ground its vision of humanity and the future. The result of such revivalism is that the more one faith tradition asserts its distinctiveness, the more it alienates other faith communities. This leads to communal tension and disunity. In this increasingly tension-filled situation what sort of Jesus should the Christian church project? Should one respond to one fundamentalism with another and create even greater tension and disharmony? Or should one look for alternative images of human solidarity that would mediate hope in the midst of communal tensions, religious bigotry and social disruption? Does the power of Jesus’ name become less effective if Christians refrain from commending it competitively among the other divers names?</p>
<p class="subhead"><b>THE QUESTION OF UNIQUENESS—A RE-LOOK</b></p>
<p class="indent">This leads us to the next issue, the question of Christian claims for finality and uniqueness of Jesus. In the light of changed circumstances, hitherto held christological presuppositions have to be rethought. At a time when Asian Christians are involved in vigorous dialogue with people of <a id="page_262"/>other religions, consciously trying to be less arrogant in their theological appraisal of other faiths, and earnestly engaged in building up an equitable society in conjunction with peoples of other faiths or none, how do Asian Christians redefine these terms? How and who determines this finality and uniqueness of Jesus? Are these claims made by Jesus or are they made on his behalf by faith communities? How does one perceive the finality of Jesus after historical-critical methods have modified some of the excessive claims made for Jesus in the gospels? In other words, are the assertions made on behalf of Jesus truth claims or the confessional statements of a community? Are they objective claims or the subjective reading of a faith community? How does a person or a text come to generate extraordinary power and influence within a group of people? Is it because communities of faith tend to invest certain persons with authority and aura?</p>
<p class="indent">Whatever may have been the usefulness of some theological terms in the past, can Asian Christians go on making claims of uniqueness and finality? Even the recent distinction made by some Christian thinkers between Logos/Word of God as the historical Jesus and Logos/Word of God as the universal bond between humanity and the divine is paternalistic and condescending. Is it not time for Christians to have another look at such basic tenets as the figure of Jesus, the place of scriptural authority, and the function of Christian traditions which were all formulated in Europe of a bygone era? At that time and place they may have looked inoffensive, yet they may look harmful today in a multiple religious and social context. Basically, what Asian Christians need is to look again at the relation between God's self-disclosure in the person and work of Jesus and God's relation toward all human beings. How special is this revelation in comparison to the experiences of Buddha, Mohammed and Confucius? Does the Christian claim to uniqueness limit God's freedom to be present to people in other religious histories?</p>
<p class="subhead"><b>THE SEARCH FOR THE ACTUAL JESUS</b></p>
<p class="indent">Following from this last concern, the hermeneutical assignment that awaits Asian Christian theologians is to construct a new image of Jesus, one which is faithful to the actual, earthly Jesus. So far, there have been few serious attempts by Asian Christians to produce a scholarly picture of the historical Jesus. It is not as if this quest has had its day. Among North American scholars especially, after a lull and hesitancy, there has been a renewed interest in the question of the historical Jesus.<sup><a href="#fnr1" id="fn1">1</a></sup> This is made increasingly significant by the increased access to extra-canonical data, new archaeological discoveries and the use of new methods from disciplines such as anthropology and the social sciences. Asians need to take advantage of this and study the past, not for the sake of the past as many of the present questers seem to do, but to glean christological and theological insights that may have significant implications for the Asian context.</p>
<a id="page_263"/>
<p class="indent">Asians inherited images of Jesus which could be broadly classified under two headings: Confessional Christ and Ideological Christ. The first was shaped by the debates of the great ecumenical councils, especially Chalcedon; the second was influenced by the ideological and expansionist needs of the early modern missionary era. Neither of these constructs of Jesus was concerned with retrieving the actual Jesus. The challenge present-day Asian Christians face is to refashion in a fresh way the claim that Christianity would make for Jesus without being unfaithful to his Jewish milieu, and at the same time making accessible the mystery of Jesus to different faith communities without sounding superior. The latter is an important task repeatedly expressed in these pages. But the former is equally imperative because some of the Asian christological constructions border on the anti-Semitic. Historically, Western exegesis contributed significantly to fomenting anti-Jewish feeling. Hermeneutically Asians did not play any direct part in such an exercise, but anti-Semitism was bequeathed to them, and the uncritical use of it is evident in some Asian writers. To look for the historical Jesus and place him, as far as one is able, in his own social, economic and political context is to overcome such pitfalls. Such a placement of Jesus in his cultural ambience will also enable Asian Christians to go beyond the initial, ideal and predominantly dogmatic images.</p>
<p class="subhead"><b>JESUS: WISDOM TEACHER</b></p>
<p class="indent">One aspect of the actuality of Jesus which is under-exploited by Asian Christian thinkers is that of Jesus as a sage. Jesus as a Wisdom figure may be a means to appropriate him in a religiously pluralistic milieu. The strength of the Wisdom tradition is that it is universal. It belongs to all cultures and finds expression in all lands. Wisdom acknowledges that if Wisdom is spirit, it is not restricted to Israel alone (Wis. 1:17). The potency of the Wisdom tradition is its ability to borrow from other cultures, and Israel's Wisdom is no exception.</p>
<p class="indent">One of the fruits of the recent Jesus research is the emergence of Jesus as a sage and the increasing attention being paid to his Wisdom sayings. This provides an opportunity for Asian interpreters to engage in fruitful dialogue with their Euro-American counterparts. Present researchers are not sure whether to place Jesus within the context of conventional Jewish Wisdom of his day or to depict him within the hellenistic culture and portray him as a Cynic teacher.<sup><a href="#fnr2" id="fn2">2</a></sup> Irrespective of these questions, what emerges is the figure of a sage who uses material not only from rural Palestine but also from the wider Hellenistic culture and who offers a critique of the oppressive values of those institutions and issues that matter most to Asians—family, honor, purity, marriage and poverty.</p>
<p class="indent">The undue concentration on the distinctive features of Jesus’ teaching has not only tended to obscure the aphoristic elements in his sayings but has also led to a low view of other cultures and faiths. Bracketing Jesus <a id="page_264"/>with other sages does not minimize his importance. Rather, it points to the creative possibilities of the universally held elements in the teachings of Jesus. The common elements should provide a starting point to engage in dialogue with people of other faiths, rather than the distinctive features which have been used to sustain the traditional claim to a superior knowledge of the truth. In the new figure of Jesus as a sage, Asian Christians may discover a person who helps them to find a way to respond to religious pluralism and the greater problems of human injustice. Jesus as sage is open and less imperialistic than some alternative portraits, and at the same time committed to the uplifting of the poor, women, children and the dispossessed.</p>
<p class="subhead"><b>A HERMENEUTICAL CONUNDRUM</b></p>
<p class="indent">Finally, I would like to end with an exegetical poser. I invite you to look at the Caesarea Philippi incident again. Not the one recorded in Mark's gospel but the one found in the Gospel of Thomas, the apostle of Asia. As in Mark's gospel, Jesus conducts an in-house survey among his disciples, but the wording of his question is different—“Compare me to something and tell me what I am like.” The disciples’ responses are also different from those of the synoptic accounts. Simon Peter answers, “You are like a just angel.” Matthew responds, “You are like a wise philosopher.” Thomas’ answer is “Teacher, my mouth is utterly unable to say what you are like,” to which Jesus answers, “I am not your teacher,” and accuses him of being intoxicated. Jesus takes Thomas aside, and the text says that Jesus then spoke three sayings to him. When Thomas joins the others, naturally they are keen to know what Jesus has told him and not told them. Thomas says to them, “If I tell you one of the sayings that he spoke to me, you will pick up rocks and stone me, and fire will come from the rocks and devour you.”</p>
<p class="indent">The question then is what did Jesus say to the apostle of Asia that would cause dissension and disruption among his own friends? Perhaps these Asian attempts to discern the lineaments of Jesus begin to provide us with an answer.</p>
<p class="subhead"><b>NOTES</b></p>
<p class="noteitem"><a href="#fn1" id="fnr1">1</a>. See Marcus J. Borg, “Portraits of Jesus in Contemporary North American Scholarship,” <i>Harvard Theological Review</i> 84:1 (1991):1-22; “A Renaissance in Jesus Studies,” <i>Theology Today</i> 45 (1988):280-92. For implications of such research for third-world theologies, see R. S. Sugirtharajah, “What do Men Say Remains of Me?: Current Jesus Research and Third World Christologies,” <i>Asia Journal of Theology</i> 5 (1991):331-37.</p>
<p class="noteitem"><a href="#fn2" id="fnr2">2</a>. See Burton L. Mack, <i>A Myth of Innocence: Mark and Christian Origins</i> (Philadelphia: Fortress Press, 1988); F. G. Downing, <i>Jesus and the Threat of Freedom</i> (London: SCM Press, 1987) and <i>Christ and the Cynics: Jesus and Other Radical Preachers in the First-Century Tradition</i> (Sheffield: JSOT Press, 1988).</p>
</div>
</body>
</html>