<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>part2a</title>
<link href="ebook_style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
<meta content="urn:uuid:e628635c-8169-4333-a0b2-b0f205aae46e" name="Adept.expected.resource"/>
</head>
<body>
<div>
<a id="page_127"/>
<h2 class="chaptertitle2"><big>A</big>n <big>I</big>nterpretative <big>F</big>oreword</h2>
<p class="chapterauthor1">R. S. SUGIRTHARAJAH</p>
<p class="indent">During the 1970s Asian Christians’ reflections on Jesus took on a new shape. As the foregoing pages indicate, Asian christological constructions hitherto were largely confined to reorienting Jesus to the various religious traditions of the continent. But a change in theological perspective gradually emerged in Asian thinking during this period.</p>
<p class="indent">Disheartened by the failure of massive development programs to alleviate the poverty of the Asian masses, disenchanted with the failure of ancient Asian religions to address the everyday needs of the people, and enthused by the insights of Latin American liberation theology, some Asian Christians pressed for a different starting point to do theology—the staggering poverty of the Asian people. To put it in simple terms, it meant that the crux of the theological problem in Asia was the millions of empty stomachs, and serious reflection on Jesus would have to address this vexing issue. Amid existential poverty, some Asian Christians reckoned the presence of religions irrelevant or even a hindrance to progress. Hence they advocated that poverty and oppression should be at the heart of the hermeneutical process. But not all Asian Christians hold this view. There are notable exceptions. Prominent among them is the Sri Lankan theologian Aloysius Pieris. While conceding that poverty is a common factor between Asia and other third-world countries, Pieris contends that what distinguishes Asia is its multiple religious traditions. Hence, for him, religious pluralism and poverty are inseparable as the reality which constitutes the one source of any theologizing in Asia. In his view, Asian Christian theology must address both these issues together—religiousness and poverty. This is an ongoing debate which needs considerable attention. A comprehensive christology should address these two foci together as both arise out of the same need—to make sense of Jesus. They need not contradict each other.</p>
<p class="indent">Articles assembled in this section wrestle with these issues. A common concern runs through the first four essays; namely, to liberate Jesus from the dogmatic, cultic and institutional formulations in which he is enveloped and to place him alongside the peoples of Asia. In other words, it is a concern to seek a socially conscious Jesus who can make sense of Asia's history filled with tragedy and misery; this is necessary because the traditional <a id="page_128"/>profiles of Jesus propagated by the churches alienate him from his own continent and his own people.</p>
<p class="indent">The first four essayists present four different ways of recovering and rescuing a Jesus who can be identified with the Asian masses.</p>
<p class="indent">Taiwanese theologian C. S. Song<sup><a href="#fnr1" id="fn1">1</a></sup> seeks Jesus not in mass-produced statues, or in cathedral windows or in church traditions but in the passion of his pain. It is in his pain that the pain of Asian people is mingled and their hopes are realized for a qualitatively different society.</p>
<p class="indent">Kosuke Koyama,<sup><a href="#fnr2" id="fn2">2</a></sup> who comes from Japan, finds Jesus in the periphery of life. The “blond Jesus” of Western theology, which has occupied the center stage in theology and mission according to Koyama, has provided years of painful irrelevance for Asians. Koyama's contention is that Jesus is the center, always in motion toward the periphery; he thus reveals the mind of God, who is concerned about people on the periphery.</p>
<p class="indent">Byung Mu Ahn,<sup><a href="#fnr3" id="fn3">3</a></sup> a Korean biblical scholar, tries to counterbalance the kerygmatic Christ and the doctrine-oriented Christ that predominate in Korean thinking by recovering the Galilean Jesus in the pages of the gospels, the Jesus who mingles with and accepts the <i>minjung</i><sup><a href="#fnr4" id="fn4">4</a></sup> of his time. Such a Jesus, in Byung Mu Ahn's view, not only comes nearer to the intentions of the historical Jesus but also offers sustenance to the oppressed peoples of Asia.</p>
<p class="indent">Sebastian Kappen,<sup><a href="#fnr5" id="fn5">5</a></sup> an Indian theologian, faced with a de-prophetized and tradition-bound official Christianity and the ritualistic religiosity of Hinduism, detects a prophetic religiosity in Jesus. Kappen tries to relate Jesus to the dissenters and protesters of the sub-continent, who from the time of Buddha onward have initiated a humanizing and creative religiosity. He also suggests a proleptic aspect to Jesus, and argues for the need to learn from the Indian tradition the yogic ideal of detachment, and its aesthetic and mystical approach to the earth to complement and enrich the Jesus tradition.</p>
<p class="indent">The next article emanates from Sri Lanka, which is predominantly a Buddhist country. It is a story of theological discovery and martyrdom. Personal presence and immersion in a Buddhist village enabled Michael Rodrigo,<sup><a href="#fnr6" id="fn6">6</a></sup> a Roman Catholic priest, to discover the meaning of Jesus. Rodrigo's involvement with the villagers helped him to learn from the praxis of Buddha and, more revealingly, helped him to understand his own faith in God, and in Jesus and in Jesus’ praxis, which finally ended in Rodrigo's brutal killing.</p>
<p class="indent">Christological discourses from the perspective of Asian women are a relatively new enterprise. Utilizing their own experience of triple marginalization—as Third World, women, and Christian—and moving beyond the concerns of Euro-American feminists, Asian women are trying to create images of Jesus that will be liberating and empowering for them. The essays of Virginia Fabella<sup><a href="#fnr7" id="fn7">7</a></sup> and Chung Hyun Kyung<sup><a href="#fnr8" id="fn8">8</a></sup> are two such examples. Unlike their Euro-American counterparts, Asian women do not see the maleness <a id="page_129"/>of Jesus as a vexing issue. Both essays show how Asian women regard Jesus affectionately because of who he is, and how, out of their experience of ordeal and hardship, they invest new meanings in the traditional images of Jesus. They discover in him a new lover, helper, collaborator and companion. In their re-envisioning, he is no more a dominator or the one who lords it over their lives. Instead, he is the one who empowers, affirms and transforms their personality.</p>
<p class="indent">Down through the ages ordinary people have in their own ways creatively profiled a range of images of Jesus. Salvador T. Martinez<sup><a href="#fnr9" id="fn9">9</a></sup> narrates how poor and rural Filipinos who have had no formal education use considerable freedom and eclecticism in appropriating Jesus for their needs. Their articulation demonstrates how they select Christian impulses that resonate with their indigenous beliefs and practice. Their profiles of Jesus indicate that people are not necessarily passive recipients of teachings imposed upon them, but that they can shape and mold their faith on their own terms.</p>
<p class="indent">In sum, these construals of Jesus try to reverse some of the traditional images that emphasize his individuality, focusing on his will, his consciousness and his ability to act on his own. Instead, we see the emergence of a social “Jesusology” in which the life and work of Jesus is illuminated by his association with women, children, the poor and the displaced, and he in turn illuminates their lives. These profiles of Jesus are an indication that no christology is genuine for the Asian masses unless it is articulated from the perspective of their struggle for survival and takes due account of their religious history. Asians long for a Jesus who will sustain their battered bodies and enhance their bruised spirits and restore their broken personalities. In these emerging Asian faces of Jesus, the features growing ever clearer, this longing is finding fulfillment.</p>
<p class="subhead"><b>NOTES</b></p>
<p class="noteitem"><a href="#fn1" id="fnr1">1</a>. C. S. Song, <i>Jesus, The Crucified People</i> (New York: Crossroad, 1990), pp. 1-14.</p>
<p class="noteitem"><a href="#fn2" id="fnr2">2</a>. Kosuke Koyama, <i>Your Kingdom Come: Mission Perspectives</i>. Report on the World Conference on Mission and Evangelism (Geneva: World Council of Churches, 1980), pp. 157-70.</p>
<p class="noteitem"><a href="#fn3" id="fnr3">3</a>. Byung Mu Ahn, <i>CTC Bulletin</i> 7 (1987): 6-13.</p>
<p class="noteitem"><a href="#fn4" id="fnr4">4</a>. <i>Minjung</i> is a Korean word referring to people who are poor, oppressed and socially marginalized.</p>
<p class="noteitem"><a href="#fn5" id="fnr5">5</a>. This forms a chapter in his book, <i>Jesus and Cultural Revolution: An Asian Perspective</i> (Bombay: The Bombay Industrial league for Development, 1983), pp. 52-71.</p>
<p class="noteitem"><a href="#fn6" id="fnr6">6</a>. Michael Rodrigo, <i>CTC Bulletin</i> 7 (1987): 14-31. (Michael Rodrigo was assassinated on October 11, 1987–Ed.)</p>
<p class="noteitem"><a href="#fn7" id="fnr7">7</a>. Virginia Fabella and Sun Ai Lee Park, eds., <i>We Dare to Dream: Doing Theology as Asian Women</i> (Hong Kong: Asian Women's Resource Centre for Culture and Theology, 1989), pp. 3-13.</p>
<a id="page_130"/>
<p class="noteitem"><a href="#fn8" id="fnr8">8</a>. Chung Hyun Kyung, <i>Struggle To Be the Sun Again: Introducing Asian Women's Theology</i> (Maryknoll, N.Y.: Orbis Books, 1990; and London: SCM Press, 1991), pp. 54-73.</p>
<p class="noteitem"><a href="#fn9" id="fnr9">9</a>. Salvator T. Martinez, <i>CTC Bulletin</i> 7 (1987): 44-52.</p>
<p class="subhead"><b>SOME RELEVANT LITERATURE</b></p>
<p class="hanging1">Amjad Ali, Charles. “Towards a Christology of Rehabilitation: A Look at Two Miracle Narratives in Mark 3.1-16 &amp; 9.14-29.” <i>Focus</i> 7 (2) 1987: 116-31.</p>
<p class="hanging1">“Asian Face of Jesus,” <i>Logos</i> 17 (1978).</p>
<p class="hanging1">Beltran, Benigno P. <i>The Christology of the Inarticulate: An Inquiry into the Filipino Understanding of Jesus the Christ</i>. Manila: Divine World Publications, 1987.</p>
<p class="hanging1">Balasuriya, Tissa. “Humanity's Fall and Jesus the Saviour,” <i>Voices from the Third World</i> 11 (1988):40-75.</p>
<p class="hanging1">———. “Christ and the World Religions: An Asian Perspective.” In <i>Future of Liberation Theology: Essays in Honor of Gustavo Gutiérrez</i>, edited by Marc H. Ellis and Otto Maduro, 337-45. Maryknoll, N.Y.: Orbis Books, 1989.</p>
<p class="hanging1">Byung Mu Ahn. “The Korean Church's Understanding of Jesus: A Historical View.” <i>Voices from the Third World</i> 8 (1985):49-58.</p>
<p class="hanging1">“Christology in the Making.” <i>Jeevadhara</i> 21 (1991)—a special issue on peoples’ understanding of Jesus, edited by Samuel Rayan.</p>
<p class="hanging1">David, Kwang-Sun Suh. “Jesus and Messianic Theology.” <i>Voices from the Third World</i> 8 (1985): 86-87.</p>
<p class="hanging1">Delotavo, Allan J. “A Reflection on the Images of Christ in Filipino Culture.” <i>Asian Journal of Theology</i> 3 (1989): 524-31.</p>
<p class="hanging1">Dingayan, L. Luna. “Towards a Christology of Struggle: A Proposal for Understanding the Christ,” <i>CTC Bulletin</i> 10 (1991): 14-34.</p>
<p class="hanging1">Endo Shusako. <i>A Life of Jesus</i>. New York: Paulist Press, 1973.</p>
<p class="hanging1">Kappen, Sebastian. <i>Jesus and Freedom</i>. Maryknoll, N.Y.: Orbis Books, 1977.</p>
<p class="hanging1">Kim Chi Ha. <i>The Gold Crowned Jesus and Other Writings</i>. Maryknoll, N.Y.: Orbis Books, 1978.</p>
<p class="hanging1">Pieris, Aloysius. “Christology in Asia.” <i>Voices from the Third World</i> 11 (1988): 155-72.</p>
<p class="hanging1">Robinson, Gnana. “Jesus Christ, The Open Way and the Fellow Struggler.” <i>Asian Journal of Theology</i> 3 (1989):403-13.</p>
<p class="hanging1">Soares-Prabhu, George. “The Jesus of Faith,” <i>Voices from the Third World</i> 15 (1992):46-89.</p>
<p class="hanging1">Sugirtharajah, R. S. “Wisdom, Q, and a Proposal for a Christology.” <i>The Expository Times</i> 102 (1990):42-45.</p>
</div>
</body>
</html>