<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>part1a</title>
<link href="ebook_style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
<meta content="urn:uuid:e628635c-8169-4333-a0b2-b0f205aae46e" name="Adept.expected.resource"/>
</head>
<body>
<div>
<a id="page_2"/>
<a id="page_3"/>
<h2 class="chaptertitle2"><big>A</big>n <big>I</big>nterpretative <big>F</big>oreword</h2>
<p class="chapterauthor1">R. S. SUGIRTHARAJAH</p>
<p class="subhead"><b>THE STORY SO FAR</b></p>
<p class="indent">Interestingly, the first persons to undertake serious theological reflection on Jesus from the perspective of Asia's religious traditions were not Asian Christians but Indian Hindus. It was these Hindus from Calcutta—like Rajah Ram Mohun Roy, Keshub Chunder Sen and P. C. Mozoomdar, who belonged to the Brahmo Samaj, a Hindu reform movement—who pioneered christological discourse in the nineteenth century. It would be true to say that among other faith traditions only Hindus have worked out such elaborate and varied images of Jesus. These articulations of Hindus, though they emanate from different philosophical strands within that tradition, demonstrate personal admiration and affection for Jesus and his teachings. Their reflections have provided a variety of images:</p>
<ul class="sp">
<li class="list">Jesus as Supreme Guide to human happiness—Rajah Ram Mohun Roy;</li>
<li class="list">Jesus as true <i>Yogi</i> and Divine Humanity—Keshub Chunder Sen;</li>
<li class="list">Jesus as <i>Jivanmukta</i> (one who has attained liberation while alive)—Vivekananda;</li>
<li class="list">Jesus as the Son of Man, seeking the last, the least and the lost—Rabindranath Tagore;</li>
<li class="list">Jesus as the Supreme <i>Satyagrahi</i> (lover and fighter for truth)—Mahatma Gandhi;</li>
<li class="list">Jesus as <i>Advaitin</i> (one who has realized destiny with Brahman/God)—Swami Akhilananda;</li>
<li class="list">Mystic Christ—Radhakrishan.</li>
</ul>
<p class="indent">These Hindus enthusiastically incorporated Jesus into the thought world of Hinduism(s) and continued to remain faithful to their own traditions. None felt the urge to renounce the Hindu way of life as the gospel of Jesus did not offer anything dramatically new or different from the teachings of their seers or their own sacred texts. In their view the message of Jesus was simply the reappearance of the eternal truth. Jesus was, in essence, restating anew some of the forgotten and overlooked aspects of the perennial message.</p>
<p class="indent">In a curious way it was these Hindu responses that provided the impetus, <a id="page_4"/>inspiration and confidence for Indian Christians to develop their own indigenized portrayals of Jesus. At the early stage of missionary expansion there was reluctance among the newly converted to undertake any reflection on Jesus using their own cultural or philosophical resources. Their understanding of Jesus was largely shaped by the denominational and pietistic tendencies of the time. Like the Hindus, Indian Christians were the first among Asian Christians to free themselves from the shackles of Western ecclesiastical images of Jesus and evolve their own sketches. Here are some of their pioneering efforts:</p>
<p class="hanging">Jesus as <i>Prajapati</i> (Lord of creatures)—K. M. Banerjee;</p>
<p class="hanging">Jesus as <i>Cit</i> (Consciousness)—Brahmobandhav Upadhyaya;</p>
<p class="hanging">Jesus as <i>Avatara</i> (Incarnation)—A. J. Appasamy, V. Chakkarai;</p>
<p class="hanging">Jesus as <i>Adi Purusha</i> (the first person) and <i>Shakti</i> (power/strength)—P. Chenchiah;</p>
<p class="hanging">Jesus as Eternal <i>Om</i> (logos)—S. Jesudasan.</p>
<p class="indent">At a time when Western missionaries were using Jesus to expose the deficiencies of Hinduism, these Indian Christians took as their task to show how Hindu philosophical vocabulary can elucidate their experience of Jesus. However, some of the present-day Indian Christian <i>dalits</i> and tribals may not view such interpretations as innovative or receive them with much enthusiasm. For them, the Sanskritistic tradition from which these interpreters were trying to derive inspiration was the very system instrumental in their own oppression and marginalization. The <i>dalits</i> themselves have yet to develop their own understandings of Jesus in any particularly distinctive way. Yet seen from their context, these early Indian Christians’ expositions of Jesus were a bold hermeneutical strategy. By redefining Jesus using Hindu religious concepts, Indian Christians helped to nullify the “Jesus against religion” posture adopted by missionaries of the time, a position that Indian Christians found offensive and degrading to their own rich and ancient traditions.</p>
<p class="subhead"><b>THE CURRENT STATE OF PLAY</b></p>
<p class="indent">At present Indian Christians, or for that matter Asian Christians as a whole, stand at a new hermeneutical juncture. The old era of competition or even comparison among great religious traditions is slowly coming to an end. The theological mood now is to encounter religions on their own terms rather than to judge them by preset norms. Enormous and meticulous comparative studies of various sacred texts, doctrines and teachings of different savior figures have shown that theologically and doctrinally other religions do not depend on Jesus for their existence or pine for fulfillment in him. There is also a new realization that religious pluralism has to be actively valued and not just passively tolerated. Rather than merely credit other religions with unfulfilled potentialities or latent values, the inherent and autonomous merit that has kept them alive over centuries is now increasingly <a id="page_5"/>recognized. The hermeneutical task is to bring the person of Jesus, in conjunction with other religious figures, into a revitalizing and enriching encounter with them and with Christian faith itself. The set of essays in this section seeks to do that.</p>
<p class="indent">In the first essay, Ovey N. Mohammed<sup><a href="#fnr1" id="fn1">1</a></sup> explores the theological resemblance between Jesus and one of the more colorful Hindu savior figures—Krishna. After accentuating the parallels in the lives of these two leading religious personalities, Mohammed goes on to engage in an intratextual exegesis that highlights the similarities in the notion of salvation offered by Krishna in the <i>Gita</i> and Jesus in the New Testament. He then proceeds to discuss the implications of such a liberation-based theology of religion.</p>
<p class="indent">Hindu philosophical resources have provided a healthy hermeneutical background for numerous audacious sketches of Jesus. The dominant faith among Asians, however, is not Hinduism but Buddhism. While Hinduism and Confucianism are narrowly identified with specific ethnic communities, Buddhism has become a universal Asian phenomenon whose power and presence is felt in the social, cultural and political spheres of several Asian countries.</p>
<p class="indent">Unlike the Hindu appropriation of Jesus, which has been pleasant and cordial, Buddhism's encounter with Jesus has been less than hospitable. This was particularly evident in nineteenth-century Sri Lanka (then Ceylon), where the historical context of the time necessitated an anti-Christian posture. Polemics against Jesus involved caricaturing him as a spiritual dwarf in comparison to the Buddha. But in a contemporary hermeneutical context, Japanese theologian Seiichi Yagi evolves a new appreciation of Jesus in the light of the Buddhist claims. Borrowing from another Japanese Christian thinker, Katsumi Takizawa's distinction between first contact (the unconditional fact that God is within each of us) and secondary contact (awakening oneself to this fact—enlightenment according to Buddhism), Seiichi Yagi<sup><a href="#fnr2" id="fn2">2</a></sup> perceives Jesus as the person who was awakened to this fundamental fact just as Buddha was in his time. Such an understanding of Jesus, Yagi reckons, creates new possibilities for Christians and Buddhists to learn from each other and build bridges, rather than each claiming absolute significance for its respective founder-figure.</p>
<p class="indent">In the next essay Sri Lankan theologian Aloysius Pieris<sup><a href="#fnr3" id="fn3">3</a></sup> further explores the conflicting truth claims made on behalf of the Buddha and the Christ. Unlike Yagi, Pieris goes beyond the complex philosophical nuances and grounds the debate in the concept of human liberation and welfare. Pieris sees this as an effective starting point for sorting out the competing kerygmatic assertions in which Gautama is seen as the Buddha and Jesus is proclaimed as the Christ. After tracing the history of these interpretative claims and the ensuing religious debates, Pieris demonstrates that at the core level of these religions Buddha and Jesus meet at the path of liberation. In Pieris's view, Buddhism's liberative knowledge (gnosis) and Christianity's liberative love (agape) complement each other. Pieris's article was <a id="page_6"/>a trail-blazer in advocating liberation as the common ground for a theology of religions. Echoes of such a proposal are evident in Ovey Mohammed's essay.<sup><a href="#fnr4" id="fn4">4</a></sup></p>
<p class="indent">In the fourth essay Korean theologian Jung Young Lee<sup><a href="#fnr5" id="fn5">5</a></sup> tries to relate Jesus to the <i>Yin</i> and <i>Yang</i>, which are characteristic of the Chinese thought world. He perceives in the interaction between <i>Yin</i> and <i>Yang</i>, a corrective to the either/or way of thinking that dominates the Western way of doing theology with its absolute and exclusive claims. Over against this the interplay between <i>Yin</i> and <i>Yang</i> offers a middle way of complementariness and a possibility for change and creativity. Jung Young Lee tries to relate Jesus to <i>Yin</i> and <i>Yang</i>; he perceives Jesus as the way of change and progress. Lee also provides a new understanding of divinity/humanity, death/resurrection and creation/redemption in the light of the Chinese conception of <i>Yin</i> and <i>Yang</i>—change and relativity.</p>
<p class="indent">Unlike the sacred texts of Hinduism and Buddhism, Islam has worked out its discourse about Jesus within its own holy texts. The hermeneutical task in an Islamic context is to promote and clarify Christian understandings of Jesus among Muslims, who already have their own perceptions of him. Alexander Malik,<sup><a href="#fnr6" id="fn6">6</a></sup> who comes from a predominantly Muslim country, Pakistan, advocates theological engagement with his fellow Muslim neighbors with a view to illuminating each other's perceptions. Such an interaction, he reckons, will highlight areas of christological agreement as well as incompatible differences. His essay also elaborates a Bible-centered christology that addresses the religious, social and cultural demands of the Islamic situation.</p>
<p class="indent">Faced with the challenge of religious pluralism to traditional christology, recent theological thinking has broadly identified three positions in defining Christian attitudes to other religions—exclusive, inclusive and pluralist. However unsatisfactory this categorization may be, it does at least try to address the question of how one views Jesus in relation to other faith traditions. Michael Amaladoss,<sup><a href="#fnr7" id="fn7">7</a></sup> an Indian Christian, seeks a paradigm that would place Jesus between inclusivist and pluralist positions. Like Raimundo Panikkar, he perceives the distinction between the universal Word and the particular manifestation of it in the historical Jesus. There is more to the Word than its historical concretization in Jesus of Nazareth. The Word can appear differently in other faith traditions. Amaladoss likens this to the advaitic concept of the One and the many. Such an understanding, Amaladoss holds, would allow for other historical names and manifestations of the Word, without requiring Christians to give up their personal commitment to Jesus as the Christ or urging others to accept him.</p>
<p class="indent">Stanley Samartha,<sup><a href="#fnr8" id="fn8">8</a></sup> like other Indians, tries to wrestle with the perennial question: how to evolve an image of Jesus which is Indian and at the same time Christian. He sees in India's long acceptance of a sense of Mystery, which is the common possession of all religions, the starting point to work out a God-centered christology. Samartha reckons that a Mystery-centered <a id="page_7"/>Christian faith would avoid any clannish claims upon God or any claim to exclusive understanding and would be helpful in establishing new relations with neighbors of other faiths.</p>
<p class="indent">In sum, these essays are a genuine and vigorous attempt to present Jesus without depreciating, renouncing or belittling other religious traditions or savior figures. They consciously acknowledge that Jesus is the paradigm and promise for Christians. This affirmation enables Asian Christians to discover other instances of God's revelation and love in other people and in their spiritual quests.</p>
<p class="subhead"><b>NOTES</b></p>
<p class="noteitem"><a href="#fn1" id="fnr1">1</a>. Ovey N. Mohammed, <i>Journal of Ecumenical Studies</i> 26 (1989): 664-80.</p>
<p class="noteitem"><a href="#fn2" id="fnr2">2</a>. Seiichi Yagi, <i>Journal of Ecumenical Studies</i> 27 (1990): 306-26.</p>
<p class="noteitem"><a href="#fn3" id="fnr3">3</a>. Aloysius Pieris, in <i>The Myth of Christian Uniqueness: Toward a Pluralistic Theology of Religions</i>, ed. John Hick and Paul F. Knitter (Maryknoll, N.Y.: Orbis Books, 1987; and London: SCM Press, 1988), pp. 162-77.</p>
<p class="noteitem"><a href="#fn4" id="fnr4">4</a>. See, for example, Paul Knitter, “Catholic Theology of Religions at a Crossroads” in <i>Concilium</i> 183 (1986): 99-107; idem, “Interreligious Dialogue: What? Why? How?” in <i>Death or Dialogue? From the Age of Monologue to the Age of Dialogue</i>, ed. Leonard Swidler, et al. (Philadelphia: Trinity Press International, 1990; and London: SCM Press, 1990), pp. 19-44. For liberation as the theological theme among major religions of Asia such as Hinduism, Buddhism, Sikhism, Islam, etc., see <i>Religions and Liberation</i>, ed. Asghar Ali Engineer (Delhi: Ajanta Publications, 1989); idem, <i>Islam and Liberation</i> (New Delhi: Sterling Publishers, 1990); Dharam Singh, <i>Sikh Theology of Liberation</i> (New Delhi: Harman Publishing House, 1991); Daniel Cohn-Sherbok, ed., <i>World Religions and Human Liberation</i> (Maryknoll, N.Y.: Orbis Books, 1992).</p>
<p class="noteitem"><a href="#fn5" id="fnr5">5</a>. Jung Young Lee, <i>The Theology of Change: A Christian Concept of God in an Eastern Perspective</i> (Maryknoll, N.Y.: Orbis Books, 1979), pp. 86-102.</p>
<p class="noteitem"><a href="#fn6" id="fnr6">6</a>. Alexander Malik, <i>CTC Bulletin</i> 7 (1987): 37-43.</p>
<p class="noteitem"><a href="#fn7" id="fnr7">7</a>. Michael Amaladoss, <i>Making All Things New: Dialogue, Pluralism and Evangelization in Asia</i> (Maryknoll, N.Y.: Orbis Books, 1990), pp. 83-99.</p>
<p class="noteitem"><a href="#fn8" id="fnr8">8</a>. Stanley Samartha, <i>One Christ—Many Religions: Toward a Revised Christology</i> (Maryknoll, N.Y.: Orbis Books, 1991), pp. 76-91.</p>
<p class="subhead"><b>SOME RELEVANT LITERATURE</b></p>
<p class="hanging1">Baago, Kaj. <i>Pioneers of Indigenous Christianity</i>. Madras: The Christian Literature Society, 1969.</p>
<p class="hanging1">Banawiratma, J. B. “Jesus as Guru: A Christology in the Context of Java (Indonesia),” <i>Exchange</i> 8 (1984): 33-57. (An English summary by J. Bastiaens, E. v.d. Peet, and E. Wiegant.)</p>
<p class="hanging1">Boyd, Robin. <i>An Introduction to Indian Christian Theology</i>. Madras: The Christian Literature Society, 1969.</p>
<p class="hanging1">de Silva, Lily. “Wisdom and Compassion of the Buddha and Jesus Christ in Their Role as Religious Teachers,” <i>Dialogue</i> 17 [1-3] (1990): 1-28.</p>
<p class="hanging1">Gandhi, M. K. <i>The Message of Jesus Christ</i>. Bombay: Bharatiya Vidya Bhavan, 1964.</p>
<a id="page_8"/>
<p class="hanging1">Ikuo, Matsunaga. “A New Quest for Christology? A Current Issue for Theology in Japan,” <i>The Japan Christian Quarterly</i> 52 (1986): 150-66.</p>
<p class="hanging1">Jesudasan, Ignatius. “Gandhi's Way of the Cross,” in <i>Gandhi on Christianity</i>, edited by Robert Ellsberg, pp. 92-100. Maryknoll, N.Y. : Orbis Books, 1991.</p>
<p class="hanging1"><i>Jesus Christ with People in Asia</i>: Report of a Consultation in Singapore. Singapore: Christian Conference of Asia, n.d.</p>
<p class="hanging1">Koyama, Kosuke. “The Asian Approaches to Jesus,” <i>Missiology</i> 12 (1984): 435-47.</p>
<p class="hanging1">Lee, Peter, K. H. and Shih Heng-Ching. “Karma and Christ,” <i>Ching Feng</i> 31 [1] (1988): 24-47.</p>
<p class="hanging1">Panikkar, Raymond. “Confrontation Between Hinduism and Christ,” <i>New Blackfriars</i> 50 (1968): 197-204. Idem, <i>Salvation in Christ: Concreteness and Universality, the Supername</i>. Santa Barbara, 1972.</p>
<p class="hanging1">Pieris, Aloysius. <i>An Asian Theology of Liberation</i>. Maryknoll, N.Y.: Orbis Books, 1988; and Edinburgh: T&amp;T Clark, 1988. See pp. 59-65. Idem, <i>Love Meets Wisdom: A Christian Experience of Buddhism</i>. Maryknoll, N.Y.: Orbis Books, 1988. See 110-35.</p>
<p class="hanging1">Raju, R. J. “The Gospels with an Indian Face,” <i>Vidyajyoti</i> 55 [2 and 3] (1991): 61-72 and 121-41.</p>
<p class="hanging1">Samartha, Stanley, J. <i>The Hindu Response to the Unbound Christ</i>. The Christian Literature Society: Madras, 1974.</p>
<p class="hanging1">Sen, Keshub Chunder. <i>Lectures in India</i>. London: Cassells and Company, 1866.</p>
<p class="hanging1">Sharma, Arvind, ed. <i>Neo-Hindu Views of Christianity</i>. Leiden: E. J. Brill, 1988.</p>
<p class="hanging1">Thomas, M. M. <i>The Acknowledged Christ of the Indian Renaissance</i>. London: SCM Press, 1969.</p>
<p class="hanging1">Yagi, Dickson Kazuo. “Christ for Asia: Yellow Theology for the East,” <i>Review and Expositor</i> as [4] (1991): 357-78.</p>
<p class="hanging1">Yagi, Seiichi. “‘I’ in the Words of Jesus,” in <i>The Myth of Christian Uniqueness</i>, pp. 117-34.</p>
<p class="hanging1">———. and Leonard Swidler, eds. <i>A Bridge to Buddhist-Christian Dialogue</i>. New York: Paulist Press, 1990, pp. 139-44.</p>
</div>
</body>
</html>