<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>part2</title>
<link href="ebook_style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
<meta content="urn:uuid:e628635c-8169-4333-a0b2-b0f205aae46e" name="Adept.expected.resource"/>
</head>
<body>
<div>
<a id="page_125"/>
<h2 class="partnumber">Part Two</h2>
<h2 class="parttitle">N<small>EWLY</small> E<small>MERGING</small> P<small>ROFILES OF</small> J<small>ESUS</small> A<small>MID</small> A<small>SIA'S</small> P<small>OVERTY AND</small> R<small>ELIGIOUS</small> P<small>LURALITY</small></h2>
<p class="body-text"><i>“He understands the hearts of the wretched, because His entire life was wretched. He knows the agonies of those who die a miserable death, because He died in misery. He was not in the least powerful. He was not beautiful.”</i></p>
<p class="body-text2"><i>“But look at the Church. Look at the city of Rome,” Nishi countered. “The cathedrals we saw were all like golden palaces, and not even the people of Mexico City could imagine the grandeur of the mansion where the Pope lives.”</i></p>
<p class="body-text2"><i>“Do you think that is what He would have wished?” The man shook his head angrily. “Do you think He is to be found within those garish cathedrals? He does not dwell there. He lives…not within such buildings. I think he lives in wretched homes of these Indians.”</i></p>
<p class="body-text2"><i>“Why?”</i></p>
<p class="body-text2"><i>“That is how He spent His life,” replied the renegade monk in a voice filled with assurance, then he lowered his eyes to the ground and repeated the same words to himself. “This is how He lived His life. He never visited the houses of those who were puffed up or contented. He sought out only the ugly, the wretched, the miserable and the sorrowful.”</i></p>
<p class="right1">from Shusaku Endo's <i>Samurai</i></p>
</div>
</body>
</html>