<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>prologue</title>
<link href="ebook_style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
<meta content="urn:uuid:e628635c-8169-4333-a0b2-b0f205aae46e" name="Adept.expected.resource"/>
</head>
<body>
<div>
<a id="page_viii"/>
<h2 class="chaptertitle2"><big>P</big>rologue and <big>P</big>erspective</h2>
<p class="chapterauthor">R. S. SUGIRTHARAJAH</p>
<p class="indent">I would like to begin by juxtaposing three statements:</p>
<p class="indent">“Are you the one who is to come, or should we expect someone else?” (John the Baptist).</p>
<p class="indent">“Where is he?” (the Magi).</p>
<p class="indent">“Sir, we wish to see Jesus” (Greek worshipers at Jerusalem).</p>
<p class="indent">These three statements from the gospels broadly encapsulate the anxiety, mood and expectations of Asian Christians about Jesus. The first one expresses the misgivings and the ambivalence Asian Christians feel about the images of Jesus that were first introduced to them by foreign missionaries and still dominate their thinking. The other two epitomize the urge and the desire of Asian Christians to discover for themselves the evidence of his presence in their midst and his place among other savior figures of the region. This volume of essays attempts to illustrate the range and diversity of their discoveries in recent times.</p>
<p class="indent">Images of Jesus imported to Asia are so wrapped up in various christological configurations that one often overlooks the fact that Jesus came from Asia, or to be precise, west Asia. He was raised up and engaged in brief public activity in and around the villages and cities of Palestine. Early on, there was a strong eastward thrust of the Jesus movement through Persia and Afghanistan, but much of this was disintegrating by the time of the emergence of Islam, leaving only a struggling minority in South India and a church precariously established in China and ultimately disappearing in a welter of civil war. It took nearly fifteen hundred years before the rest of Asia could feel the full impact of Jesus’ personality and the significance of his teaching. It was only through the Western missionary irruption beginning in the fifteenth century that the rest of Asia came to know Jesus.</p>
<p class="indent">When Jesus made his belated second visit to the eastern part of Asia, he did not come as a Galilean sage showing solidarity with its seers and wisdom teachers. Rather, he came as an alien in his own home territory, and more tellingly, as a clannish god of the <i>parangis</i> (a term used by Indians during the salad days of the empire to describe the foreigners) sanctioning the subjugation of the peoples of Asia and their cultures. He was projected and paraded as the totem symbol of the privileged and the powerful.</p>
<a id="page_ix"/>
<p class="indent">Since then there have been a number of attempts by Asian Christians to counteract this imperial, supremacist and absolutist understanding of Jesus. The essays assembled here are examples of such an enterprise. These discourses try to re-Asianize and refashion Jesus on Asian terms to meet the contextual needs of Asian peoples.</p>
<p class="indent">These discourses were produced under a wide variety of cultural, political, social and ecclesiastical contexts in Asia. They encapsulate the richness and the diversity of the continent and its people. In spite of their divergent situations, one can identify certain common elements highlighted by them.</p>
<p class="indent">1. They fiercely resist any attempts to apply well-established and timeless truth about Jesus. For them, all understandings of Jesus arise out of particular contextual needs. They demonstrate that perceptions of Jesus are not validated by their timeless claims or by their dogmatic soundness, but by the appropriateness of the image to a specific context. In other words, Asian Christians continue the hermeneutical tradition created by early Christian writers. Like the producers of early Christian literature, these essayists try to respond to the questions, priorities and needs of their community. For them, christological discourse is not only about the explication of preconceived notions about Jesus or an exercise in the application of time-tested truths, but also about their experience of struggle and survival. Thus they are consciously aware that their understandings of Jesus do not represent a neutral, detached, value-free enterprise. Nor are they subjective sentimentality devoid of any critical reflection. The primary purpose of these Asian faces of Jesus is not only to help people to understand their Christian faith but equally to help them change the desperate inhuman situation in which many of them are placed.</p>
<p class="indent">2. Their christological constructions demonstrate that one need not necessarily appeal to precedents or paradigms enshrined in the gospels or in other early Christian works, nor have these constructions necessarily based on or legitimated by canonical writings. As new hermeneutical horizons open, new interpretative resources can be creatively employed to unravel the mystery of Jesus. Thus they weave a wide variety of cultural symbols, philosophical insights and social concerns of Asia into their christological articulations. These understandings of Jesus indicate that as fresh horizons open up, the perceptions of Jesus that emerge may not resemble either in form or content portrayals of him depicted in the Christian scriptures. They also raise the question of why Jewish thought patterns have to be the norm for the christological enterprise of people who are not familiar with their nuances. It is not that Asians are reluctant to learn from or utilize the hermeneutical resources of the Jewish people. The point of the Asian articulations of Jesus is that if the Christian church in the fifth century was successful in delicately maintaining the enigma of Jesus in the language, mood and the spirit of that hellenistic period, why should not Asians draw on their own hermeneutical reservoir to fashion Jesus for their own time and place?</p>
<a id="page_x"/>
<p class="indent">3. These christological formulations arise primarily out of the theological import of Jesus and his message. They are concerned, in consequence, with the contextual relevance and essential significance of Jesus for the Asian masses. They see their task as making sense of Jesus amid the poverty and religious pluralism of Asia. Thus they show little interest in an academic reconstruction of biographical details.</p>
<p class="indent">There is at present a new interest among Euro-American interpretative guilds in combing extra-canonical literature to construct the historical figure of Jesus from among apocryphal materials and archeological evidence. However, the academic vigor they show in investigating the historical Jesus recedes when they apply their findings to the concerns of the contemporary world. For instance, E. P. Sanders, in an otherwise remarkable portrayal of Jesus in his own Jewish milieu, refuses to offer any suggestion as to how the Jesus he describes is relevant to Christian faith and practice. He writes in <i>Jesus and Judaism</i> that this is a theological problem into which he “is not going to venture.”<sup><a href="#fnr1" id="fn1">1</a></sup> Asian interpreters, on the other hand, see their task as bringing the vision of Jesus to the masses of Asia. For them, the artificial dichotomy imposed by Western academics between historical exegesis and theology—between the brute historical facts and faith formulations—does not exist. The crucial hermeneutical question is not what the historical Jesus looked like but what he means for Asia today.</p>
<p class="indent">Contextual demands prompt them to unleash sketches of Jesus intuitively and imaginatively without benefit of the technical skill or sophisticated knowledge displayed by present Jesus researchers. Whereas Euro-American christological reflections insist on logic, internal coherence, and precise theories of knowledge, prefer to discover Jesus in the pages of the written text, and place him in a social, political and religious environment, Asian understandings of Jesus rely on impulses and assortments of ideas and contextual needs; they take him out of his milieu and place him with the peoples of Asia and with other venerated sages like Buddha, Krishna and Confucius. They try to take Jesus out of the study into the dusty streets of Asia and let him mingle with other seers and savior figures.</p>
<p class="indent">4. These christological reflections accentuate the hermeneutical emphases of a minority community. Asian Christians live as an insignificant and divided group among domineering and often overpowering neighbors who profess other faith traditions. Thus for them hermeneutical activity is more than knowing about Jesus; it is a way of coping as Christians amid external and internal pressures. Through these christological articulations they try on the one hand to redeem themselves from the Western associations with which they have been tainted, and on the other to resist the easy option to allow themselves to be assimilated into the religious and cultic systems of the larger communities. What these discourses indicate is the confidence with which Asian Christians make use of their own indigenous resources, which they have often been asked to repudiate and disparage. The vigorous and creative use of local resources is an indication that any christological <a id="page_xi"/>formulation should not separate them from their neighbors but enable them to cooperate in the struggle for an equitable society and the search for a better tomorrow. In other words, these understandings of Jesus are a way of feeling and contributing toward the struggles for social and spiritual emancipation of all the peoples of Asia.</p>
<p class="subhead"><b>SELECTION AND ARRANGEMENT</b></p>
<p class="indent">Recently there has been an explosion of new, powerful and bold Asian reflections on Jesus. The materials span many different cultures and countries. It is not an easy task to produce a manageable volume choosing from a vast and ever-expanding amount of material. The essays included in this volume are chosen on the criterion that in their christological articulation they take into account at least one of the following:</p>
<p class="hanging">a) a particular religio-cultural or socio-political reality of Asia;</p>
<p class="hanging">b) Asian symbols, sense, impulses and popular and philosophical insights;</p>
<p class="hanging">c) interreligious enrichment or eradication of class, caste, tribal and gender barriers.</p>
<p class="indent">These essays are arranged under two themes, though they obviously overlap. Though this division is not clear cut, it enables one to feel the tension between the religio-cultural and socio-economic realities of Asia. <a href="part1.xhtml">Part One</a>, “Jesus Amid Other Asian Ways, Truths and Lights,” as the title suggests, contains some contemporary attempts by Asian Christians to redefine Jesus in a context that brims with founders of religions, teachers of wisdom and proclaimers of truth. Firmly committed to Jesus, these essayists try to reorient Jesus to Hindu, Buddhist, Islamic and Chinese contexts in order to tone down some of the offensiveness and triumphalism of an earlier era; they look for common elements to provide starting points for dialogue with people of other faiths. The last two essays in this section try to offer a theology of religion for a multi-religious context.</p>
<p class="indent"><a href="part2.xhtml">Part Two</a>, which is entitled “Newly Emerging Profiles of Jesus Amid Asia's Poverty and Religious Plurality,” addresses issues raised by the new departure point for doing theology in Asia—poverty and economic oppression, which is partly the consequence of colonialism and the continuing exploitation by mercantile firms of industrialized nations, and partly of internal origin. The essays’ main thrust is to extricate Jesus from abstract, historicist and dogmatic clichés and re-envision him as one who identified with the everyday struggles for survival of Asian people. This section also includes reflective examples from an Asian feminist perspective, which is relatively new to the Asian theological scene. They clearly demonstrate the intrinsic connection between the life of Jesus and the lives of Asian women. At the same time, traditional images of Jesus are radically refashioned in the light of their suffering and praxis.</p>
<p class="indent">The last essay in this section illustrates peoples’ profiles of Jesus. Understandably, <a id="page_xii"/>as this selection indicates, ordinary people use their own parameters to profile a Jesus who can empower and sustain them. Whether the religiosity of the Asian masses and the poverty of its teeming millions should together form an inseparable locus for Asian theological reflection, or whether poverty alone should be its proper context, is still an ongoing matter of debate among these Asian Christian thinkers.</p>
<p class="indent">These essays germinated out of different contextual concerns and were also produced to meet different publishing styles and formats. They are reproduced here with little editorial touch-up beyond a tidying of the footnotes to bring them to a uniform style. Some contain sexist language. Others continue to use condescending terms like <i>non-Christians</i> to describe people of other faiths. Many of them continue to use BC and AD instead of the neutral BCE (Before the Common Era) and CE (Common Era). Christian scriptures are frequently referred to as Old and New Testaments, giving the impression that one is archaic and ancient whereas the other is recent and new. These outmoded terms are all retained as a historical reminder that some of the essays were written at a time when sensitive use of language was not a matter of great concern.</p>
<p class="indent">Two final thoughts.</p>
<p class="indent">Various terms have been used to describe the plethora of christologies formulated over the years by Christian interpreters—low, high, from above, from below, vertical, horizontal, ascending and descending. In essence, these formulations focus on Jesus and his relation to God. They see Jesus either as coming down from above to fulfill God's predetermined plan or ascending upward while remaining faithful to his human condition. The Asian profiles of Jesus found here seek to perceive Jesus in a different way—from the side. These are the understandings of men and women who are on the periphery, searching for a meaningful life. They do not address the traditional issues, such as two natures and one person, or endeavor to uncover the historical personality of Jesus. Rather, they try to grasp Jesus dynamically as they wrestle with the meaning of their very existence.</p>
<p class="indent">No understanding of Jesus is ever completely new. Every fresh perception of Jesus is part of an ongoing critical conversation with earlier or contemporary articulations. These essayists lend their own small but markedly distinct voices to the inexhaustible and ever-growing debate about the significance of Jesus. In raising their distinctive voices they seek emancipation for themselves, but in the process they also seek to liberate Jesus. No one can deny that for the sake of human enhancement and harmony both are needed badly and urgently.</p>
<p class="subhead"><b>NOTE</b></p>
<p class="noteitem"><a href="#fn1" id="fnr1">1</a>. E. P. Sanders, <i>Jesus and Judaism</i> (Philadelphia: Fortress, 1985; and London: SCM Press, 1985), p. 327. See also pp. 333-34.</p>
</div>
</body>
</html>