<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>chapter09</title>
<link href="ebook_style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
<meta content="urn:uuid:5bf1d25e-4978-4604-b0f7-22d24fac0880" name="Adept.expected.resource"/>
</head>
<body>
<div>
<a id="page_179"/>
<h2 class="chap_tit"><span class="underline">CHAPTER 9</span></h2>
<p class="chapz"><b>Liberation and the Christian Ethic</b></p>
<p class="indent">The black struggle for liberation involves a total break with the white past, “the overturning of relationships, the transformation of life and then a reconstruction.”<sup><a href="notes.xhtml#ch09-fnr1" id="ch09-fn1">1</a></sup> Theologically, this means that black people are prepared to live according to God's eschatological future as defined by the reality of Christ's presence in the social existence of oppressed people struggling for historical liberation. This perspective informs black people's view of suffering and enables them to know that white people do not have the last word on black existence.</p>
<p class="indent">Because black liberation means a radical break with the existing political and social structures and a redefinition of black life along the lines of black power and self-determination, it is to be expected that white theologians and assorted moralists will ask questions about methods and means. Theologically and philosophically, they want to know whether revolutionary violence can be justified as an appropriate means for the attainment of black liberation. If Black Theology is Christian theology, how does it reconcile violence with Jesus’ command to turn the other cheek and to go the second mile (Matt. 5:39)? Is it not true that violence is a negation of the gospel of Jesus Christ?</p>
<p class="indent">These are favorite <i>white</i> questions, and it is significant that they are almost always addressed to the oppressed and almost never to the oppressors. This fact alone provides the clue to the motive behind the questions. White people are not really concerned about violence in all cases but only when they are the victims. As long as blacks are beaten and shot, they are strangely silent, as if they are unaware of the inhumanity committed against the black community. Why didn't we hear from the so-called nonviolent Christians when black people <a id="page_180"/>were <i>violently</i> enslaved, <i>violently</i> lynched, and <i>violently</i> ghettoized in the name of freedom and democracy? When I hear questions about violence and love coming from the children of slave masters whose identity with Jesus extends no further than that weekly Sunday service, then I can understand why many black brothers and sisters say that Christianity is religion, and it must be destroyed along with white oppressors. What many white people fail to realize is that their questions about violence and Christian love are not only very naïve, but are hypocritical and insulting. When whites ask me, “Are you for violence?” my rejoinder is: “<i>Whose</i> violence?” “Richard Nixon or his victims?” “The Mississippi State Police or the students at Jackson State?” “The New York State Police or the inmates at Attica?”</p>
<p class="indent">If we are going to raise the question of violence and Christian love, it ought to be placed in its proper theological perspective. Violence is not primarily a theoretical question but a practical question, and it should be viewed in the context of Christian ethics generally and the struggle of liberation in particular. In this chapter, I intend to explore the theological foundation of the Christian ethic and its relation to divine liberation and the human struggle of freedom in an unjust society. I hope to lay to rest once and for all white people's obscene questions about whether we blacks ought to be violent in the attainment of our freedom.</p>
<p class="head" id="sub1"><b>THE INTERDEPENDENCE OF THEOLOGY AND ETHICS</b></p>
<p class="indent">The ethical question “What am I to do?” cannot be separated from its theological source, that is, what God has done and is doing to liberate the oppressed from slavery and injustice. Thus Christian theology is the foundation of Christian ethics. Theology is the Church's reflection upon the meaning of its faith-claim that God's revelation is identical with the historical freedom of the weak and the helpless. Ethics derived from theology is that branch of the Church's reflection that investigates the implication of faith in divine liberation for Christian life in the world. Formally, Christian theology asks, “Who is God?” and ethics asks, “What must we do?” Although separate questions theoretically, in practice the answer to the theological question about God includes in it the answer to the ethical question about human behavior.</p>
<p class="indent">The close connection between theology and ethics is found not only in the current theologies of liberation but also in other theologies <a id="page_181"/>as well, even though this point has often been obscured by the influence of Greek philosophy. With the aid of philosophical categories, Christian theologians began to make exorbitant claims about the “universal” character of their discourse, and consequently failed to pay sufficient attention to the danger of divorcing theology from its biblical base. Thus it became easy to minimize the connection between theology and ethics. While the black answer to the God-question focuses on the divine liberation of the oppressed, and thus includes in it God's election of the oppressed for participation with God in the struggle of freedom, other theologies have viewed divine revelation and ethical obedience differently. In the history of Western theology, we seldom find an ethic of liberation derived from the God of freedom, but rather, an ethic of the status quo, derived from Greek philosophy and from the political interests of a church receiving special favors from the state. Sometimes this status-quo ethic was expressed in terms of a philosophical emphasis on reason. At other times, the theme was faith, understood either as assent to propositional truths or as a spiritual relationship with God. Whatever the variation of emphases on faith and reason, God's revelation was interpreted, more often than not, as consistent with the values of the structures of political oppression. Thus Constantine's participation in the Arian controversy influenced not only the Church's politics but also its theology and the ethical import of that theology. That was why the early Church Fathers could ask about the Son's relation to the Father and later the Holy Spirit's relation to both without connecting the question to the historical freedom of the oppressed. Since the Church and its bishops (during the age of Constantine and thereafter) were not slaves, it did not occur to them that God's revelation in Jesus Christ is identical with the presence of his Spirit in the slave community in struggle for the liberation of humanity. They viewed God in static terms and thus tended to overlook the political thrust of the gospel. This procedure was consistent with the God of Plotinus but not with the God of Moses and Amos. Consequently, the ethics of the fourth-century Fathers differed fundamentally from biblical revelation. Instead of standing unquestionably with the outcasts and downtrodden, as the God of the Bible does, their ethics did more to preserve the status quo than to change it. Whatever else the gospel of Jesus might be, it can never be identified with the established power of the state. Thus whatever else <a id="page_182"/>Christian ethics might be, it can never be identified with the actions of people who conserve the status quo. This was the essential error of the early Church. By becoming the religion of the Roman state, replacing the public state sacrifices, Christianity became the opposite of what Jesus intended.</p>
<p class="indent">The problem of identifying Christian ethics with the status quo is also found in Augustine and Thomas Aquinas. While they differed regarding the role of faith and reason in theological discourse, they agreed that the slave should not seek to change his civil status through political struggle. According to Augustine, slavery was due to the sinfulness of the slaves. Therefore he admonished “slaves to be subject to their masters…,” serving “them with a good-heart and a goodwill….”<sup><a href="notes.xhtml#ch09-fnr2" id="ch09-fn2">2</a></sup> For Thomas, slavery was a part of the natural order of creation. Thus “the slave, in regard to his master, is an instrument…. Between a master and his slave there is a special right of domination.”<sup><a href="notes.xhtml#ch09-fnr3" id="ch09-fn3">3</a></sup></p>
<p class="indent">The identification of the will of God with the values of the status quo was not limited to early Christianity and the Middle Ages. In Protestant Christianity, this emphasis is found in Martin Luther's definition of the state as the servant of God. That was why he condemned the Peasants’ Revolt, saying that “nothing can be more poisonous, hurtful, or devilish than a rebel.” He equated the killing of a rebel with the killing of a mad dog.<sup><a href="notes.xhtml#ch09-fnr4" id="ch09-fn4">4</a></sup></p>
<p class="indent">An ethic of the status quo is also found in Calvinism and Methodism, despite John Calvin's emphasis on divine sovereignty and John Wesley's <i>Thoughts on Slavery</i>. Calvinism seemed especially suited for America with its easy affinity with capitalism and slavery. And Wesley's condemnation of slavery notwithstanding he still appeared to be more concerned about a warm heart than an enslaved body.</p>
<p class="indent">Of course, it could be argued that the Church's ethical error in relation to the oppressed and their slavery was due to the historical limitation of thought and that this limitation and its subsequent ethical error did not affect the essential truth of the Church's theology. It is not fair, so runs the argument, for us to stand in the twentieth century, with the benefit of the Enlightenment, Marx, and Fanon, and criticize Luther and Wesley for not being revolutionary in their interpretation and implementation of the gospel.</p>
<p class="indent">This argument is only partly valid. It is correct in emphasizing the social determination of ethical discourse in the Church's history. <a id="page_183"/>The Church's ethics from its beginnings to the present day has been historically determined by its social and political setting. But the argument is wrong when it suggests that the historical determination of church ethics did not affect the essential truth of church theology. When church theologians, from the time of Constantine to the present, failed to see the ethical import of the biblical God for the liberation of the oppressed, that failure occurred because of defective theology. To understand correctly the Church's ethical mistake, we must see it in connection with a prior theological mistake. The basic problem with theological ethics cannot be solved through a debate of the deliberative, prescriptive, and relational motifs of ethical norms. Neither can it be solved through a discussion of the relative merits of the institutional, operational, and intentional motifs in the implementation of ethical decisions,<sup><a href="notes.xhtml#ch09-fnr5" id="ch09-fn5">5</a></sup> although these issues are important for Christian ethics. Rather, we must unmask this error by analyzing its theological origin. The matter may be put this way: <i>Theologians of the Christian Church have not interpreted Christian ethics as an act for the liberation of the oppressed because their views of divine revelation were defined by philosophy and other cultural values rather than by the biblical theme of God as the Liberator of the oppressed</i>. If American theologians and ethicists had read the Scripture through the eyes of black slaves and their preachers, then they would have created a different set of ethical theories of the “Good.” For it is impossible truly to hear the biblical story as told in the songs and sermons of black people without also seeing God as the divine power in the lives of the oppressed, moving them toward the fullness of their humanity. An ethic derived from this God, then, must be defined according to the historical struggle of freedom. It cannot be identified with the status quo.</p>
<p class="indent">We cannot say that Luther, Calvin, Wesley, and other prominent representatives of the Church's tradition were limited by their time, as if their ethical judgments on oppression did not affect the essential truth of their theologies. They were wrong ethically because they were wrong <i>theologically</i>. They were wrong theologically because they failed to listen to the Bible—with sufficient openness and through the eyes of the victims of political oppression. How ironic it is that he who proclaimed <i>sola scriptura</i> as one of the guiding lights of his reformation did not really hear the true meaning of that proclamation. For to hear the message of Scripture is to hear and see <a id="page_184"/>the truth of God's liberating presence in history for those who are oppressed by unjust social structures. Luther could not hear God's liberating Word for the oppressed because he was not a victim. He could only see God's liberation in terms of the individual, “religious” oppression of sin and guilt. Any time God is not derived from the biblical theme of liberation of the oppressed, it is to be expected that Christian ethics will be at best indifferent toward the oppressed struggle of freedom.</p>
<p class="indent">That Luther's ethical error is much more serious than the fact that he lived during the sixteenth century and not the twentieth can be shown through an examination of contemporary American discourse on ethics. If Luther's error was due to the <i>time</i> in which he lived, then one would not expect to find similar ethical errors today. But that is just what one does find. Herbert Edwards’ essay, “Racism and Christian Ethics in America”<sup><a href="notes.xhtml#ch09-fnr6" id="ch09-fn6">6</a></sup> shows, with unmistakable clarity, that white ethicists, from Reinhold Niebuhr to James Gustafson, reflect the racism current in the society as a whole. Here racism appears in the form of <i>invisibility</i>. White theologians and ethicists simply ignore black people by suggesting that the problem of racism and oppression is only one social expression of a larger ethical concern. This error in contemporary ethical discourse is no different from Luther's error. It is an ethics of the status quo, primarily derived from an identity with the cultural values of white oppressors rather than the biblical theme of God's liberation of the oppressed. Thus Reinhold Niebuhr can speak of black people in terms of “cultural backwardness,” and then conclude: “We must not consider the Founding Fathers immoral just because they were slaveholders.”<sup><a href="notes.xhtml#ch09-fnr7" id="ch09-fn7">7</a></sup> What else can this ethical judgment mean than that Niebuhr derived his ethics from white culture and not biblical revelation? Despite slavery, lynchings, sit-ins, and boycotts, white ethicists have not made the problem of racial oppression a central issue in their theological discourse. Most ethicists limit the issue to one or two paragraphs with no more visibility than the problem of stealing a ten-cent bar of candy. And when they do say more, as with Paul Ramsey's <i>Christian Ethics and the Sit-in</i>, they spend more time informing black people about the “proper respect for law and order” than in unmasking the systemic order of white injustice. Thus Ramsey says that “simple and not so simple injustice alone has never been a sufficient justification for revolutionary change.”<sup><a href="notes.xhtml#ch09-fnr8" id="ch09-fn8">8</a></sup> This blindness of Christian ethicists is not <a id="page_185"/>merely a cultural accident. As with Luther and others in the Western theological tradition, it is due to a <i>theological</i> blindness. White ethicists take their cue from their fellow theologians: because white theologians have not interpreted God as the Liberator of the oppressed, it follows that white ethicists would not make liberation the central motif of ethical analysis.</p>
<p class="indent">Paul Lehmann is one contemporary American theologian and ethicist who recognizes that there is a problem in the theology-ethics relationship, even though he fails to locate its essential solution. Lehmann's chief mistake, in his <i>Ethics in a Christian Context</i>, is related to his excessive dependence upon the sixteenth-century Protestant reformers for the starting point of ethical analysis, without recognizing their theological limitation. Luther and Calvin did not interpret God in the light of the liberation of the oppressed, even though Lehmann's emphasis on God's politics in history comes very <i>close</i> to saying just that. And perhaps he would have said it, if he had listened less to the Reformation and more to Scripture. But in getting close to the truth of the gospel, Lehmann naturally sensed the contradiction of contemporary discourse on ethics and theology and expressed it in terms of their separation. Lehmann put it this way:</p>
<p class="block">Without ethical analysis and criticism the dynamics of the divine activity are obscured rather than expressed. This happens whenever the concern of theology with and for dogma becomes an end in itself and hardens into dogmatism. This does not mean that there is no liturgical action, no service of God appropriate to God as he is in himself. Nor does it mean that there is no theology as such, no distinguishable and indispensable concern with and about dogma. Liturgy and theology are not devoured by ethics. Without ethical analysis and criticism, however, the political thrust of divine activity attested by the biblical story and its images is insufficiently discerned and responded to in the liturgical and theological life of the <i>Koinonia</i>.<sup><a href="notes.xhtml#ch09-fnr9" id="ch09-fn9">9</a></sup></p>
<p class="indent1">Lehmann's instinct is right but his substantive analysis of the problem is wrong. The absence of the political thrust in theological analysis of divine activity is not due to its divorce from ethics. Christian ethics is a natural child of theology, and the two have really never been separated. The problem is more complex than Lehmann <a id="page_186"/>dares admit, for such an admission would lead him to see the defect of both Reformation theology and his own theological thrust. Though Lehmann must be given credit for calling theology and ethics back to its christological base, he did not carry that point to its logical conclusion. He stops short of saying what must be said in order to remain faithful to the biblical story: namely, that God is not simply the God of politics but the God of the politics of the oppressed, liberating them from bondage. And I contend that if he had encountered that biblical truth, he would have also recognized that theology's problem is not its separation from ethics but its separation from the Scripture and its claim that God is the Liberator of the poor. The problem of Christian ethics is its dependence on a theology that does not know the God of the oppressed.</p>
<p class="indent">Christian theology's failure to ground its analysis of God in the biblical story of the divine liberation of the oppressed has led to a similar error in Christian ethics. Both theologians and ethicists tend to listen more to philosophy and culture, thereby reflecting the cultural interests of oppressors. Unfortunately, this mistake is found in a fellow black ethicist, Preston Williams. In an article entitled “James Cone and the Problem of a Black Ethic,” he pleads for the place of rationality in ethics, which, he contends, I have discarded. He writes:</p>
<p class="blockz">To the person who does not share Cone's presuppositions or interpretation of world events [his] account is not likely to be very appealing. Urging to decide this day whom you shall serve will strike both blacks and whites as being beside the point. More importantly neither blacks nor whites who affirm this will have any evidence for their conclusions other than that they accept Cone's views about race, scripture, and God's activity in spite of what they see and hear. In brief, Cone's evidence can be seen as such only after one adopts his perspective…. Rational debate and reasonable conclusions have to be foregone…. Like Cone, I believe that racism is endemic to white America, but I would prefer victory or defeat to be decided by concrete facts, not by arbitrary reading of God's acts in history. Our basic concern, then, is with <i>rational discussion of issues and decision-making based upon fact</i>.</p>
<p class="block_i"><i>Our alternative relies upon beliefs and values associated with the Christian faith and American constitutional principles. <a id="page_187"/>…[It] is determined by reliance upon some prima-facie duties acknowledged by the generality of mankind</i>.<sup><a href="notes.xhtml#ch09-fnr10" id="ch09-fn10">10</a></sup></p>
<p class="indent1">It is hard to believe that Williams could be so grossly misguided. I contend that his distortion of the issue is not due to his dependence on rationality but is a consequence of his reliance on <i>white theological irrationality</i>. Williams’ mistake was that he allowed white theological ethicists, like James Gustafson, to define the content and method of his perspective on rational discourse. But as a <i>black</i> person and scholar who has been a victim of racism in and outside the sanctuary of the Church and the halls of academia, Williams should know better than that. White theologians and ethicists are in no position to tell black people what rational discourse in ethics means. Indeed, what they call “rationality” invariably means absurdity for black people, for our history is replete with their high-sounding phrases of “freedom” and “democracy” that meant death to our mothers and fathers. Apparently Preston Williams has been reading too much from white moral teachers and too little of the tales, sermons, and songs of black people. For if he had truly listened to the mothers and fathers of black history, then he would have known the dangerous ground he was treading. Sis Goose demanded a fair (rational) trial from Br'er Fox but found only “fox-justice,” because all in the courthouse were foxes. To which black people concluded: “Now, my chilluns, listen to me, when all de folks in de cotehouse is foxes, and <i>you</i> is des’ er common goose, der ain't gwine to be much jestice for you pore cullud folks.”<sup><a href="notes.xhtml#ch09-fnr11" id="ch09-fn11">11</a></sup> This tale is no less true today when white theologians and ethicists plead for rational discourse and disinterestedness in the analysis of human behavior. If Williams really believes that “racism is endemic to white America,”<sup><a href="notes.xhtml#ch09-fnr12" id="ch09-fn12">12</a></sup> why then does he plead for a form of ethical discourse that is acknowledged by white racists? For racism lives on irrationality, and it is silly for its victim to expect the racist to adhere to values that will change the structures of oppression. Preston Williams is inviting black people to make the same mistake that Sis Goose made. And if we do, our end will also be the same. White theologians and ethicists will convene the court of rationality, and then they will convict and execute us, just as the foxes did Sis Goose.<sup><a href="notes.xhtml#ch09-fnr13" id="ch09-fn13">13</a></sup></p>
<p class="indent">White people use such terms as “rationality” and “law” as they suit their interests. They frequently discard or ignore their own definitions <a id="page_188"/>when they are no longer applicable to their political interests. Preston Williams should have encountered enough white academic trickery to know that. For even if he could get whites, in a particular discussion, to agree with blacks on a common acceptance of law and rationality, what is there to keep them from conveniently forgetting it when the occasion no longer suits their immediate welfare? Again I think Professor Williams ought to get back to the tales, for there is found the truth about which I speak. The Fox told the Goose to “come down, and don't be afraid” because the animals “passed a <i>law</i> that no animal must hurt any other animal.” But just when “the Goose was about to fly down, way off in the woods they heard a ‘woo-wooh! woo-wooh,’ ” and “the Fox started to sneak off; and the Goose said, ‘Fox, you ain't scared of that Dog, is you? Didn't all the animals pass a law at the meeting not to bother each other any more?’ ‘Yes,’ replied the Fox as he trotted away quickly, ‘the animals passed the law; but some of the animals round here ain't got much respec’ for the law.’ ” How true this tale is for the lives of black people! But despite our experience of white deceit that killed our mothers and fathers, Preston Williams would have us come down from our ethical exclusivism and sit at the table of white rationality. I am simply amazed that he could make such a suggestion.<sup><a href="notes.xhtml#ch09-fnr14" id="ch09-fn14">14</a></sup></p>
<p class="indent">Unlike Preston Williams, who begins with white rationality and American constitutional principles, I contend that the black Christian ethic must start with Scripture and the black experience. We must read each in the light of the other, and then ask, “What am I to do?” We cannot afford to let white people interpret the meaning of Scripture for us. Inevitably they will interpret the biblical story according to their racial interests. We black people must read the Bible in the light of our story to survive and God's promise to set the captives free. With the Bible in one hand and High John the Conqueror in the other, we must investigate the ethical truths of our lives. How shall we behave with a life-style that is both Christian and black? That is a difficult question, and James Gustafson and other white ethicists cannot help us, for they are part of the reason that we are faced with the problem. They would have us believe that black people's ethical dilemmas are similar to those of whites. But experientially, we know that that is not the case. Thus if we black theologians are to probe the depth of black existence and begin to create ethical structures that are consistent with our historical <a id="page_189"/>strivings to be faithful to the “God of our weary years, the God of our silent tears” who “hast brought us thus far on the way,” we must <i>step over</i> James Gustafson and begin to take theological risks that will call into question everything white theologians and ethicists have said about the “right” and the “good.” We must not be afraid to call on the “black and unknown bards of long ago” who created ethical patterns of behavior in song and story as they accepted the risks to fight for freedom. Their words may not be neatly structured to command the interests of white ethicists at Harvard Divinity School or Union Theological Seminary. But their truth is contained in the living reality of black people and not in philosophical and theological textbooks. In black people's sayings and tales, songs and sermons, are found the black ethicists’ only starting point. We must take these black realities and place them alongside biblical revelation, and then ask, “What are we black people to do?”</p>
<p class="head" id="sub2"><b>TOWARD A BLACK ETHIC OF LIBERATION</b></p>
<p class="indent">Because the ethical question “What am I to do?” cannot be separated from its theological base, Christian ethics is, to use Lehmann's phrase, “koinonia ethics.”<sup><a href="notes.xhtml#ch09-fnr15" id="ch09-fn15">15</a></sup> But unlike Lehmann, I contend that the koinonia is limited to the victims of oppression and does not include the oppressors. The ethical behavior of Christians, therefore, is defined in and by the oppressed community whom God has called into being for freedom. To ignore the historical context of the oppressed community and speak of God's politics in universal terms without specificity of words and deeds of the victims in struggle of freedom, is to distort the theological enterprise and the ethical dynamics of God's presence in the world “to make and to keep human life human” (Lehmann's phrase). Thus we can say that Christian ethics is meaningless apart from God's election of the oppressed for freedom in this world. Indeed, apart from divine liberation, there would be no community and thus no Christian ethics.</p>
<p class="indent">Contrary to Preston Williams, the behavior of Christians is not decided by rational principles that all people accept as good and right. It is decided by God's act of liberation in Jesus Christ to set the captives free. This divine act of liberation is the ground of the possibility and the actuality of human freedom. Because of Jesus Christ, our behavior can now be defined by divine behavior. Since God's revelation is an act of <a id="page_190"/>liberation for the weak and the helpless, the constituents of the koinonia inaugurated by that event are oppressed people who now know that what the world says about their personhood is not true. The encounter of God's liberating presence includes hearing the call to be obedient to the claim of divine freedom. Christian behavior is basically the behavior that arises out of the oppressed community in response to God's call to be obedient to God's will.</p>
<p class="indent">But the will of God is not a set of rules and principles of behavior derived from a philosophical study of the “Good.” We cannot know or hear the will of God apart from the social context of the oppressed community where Jesus is found calling us into being for freedom. The divine will come in an indicative form and not as an imperative. God enters into the social context of oppression and liberates the people into a new existence. At the precise moment that divine liberation happens, a divine claim is laid upon the oppressed to be what God has made them. That is why “ought” is not an accurate way of speaking of Christian ethics. Ought suggests an obligation that is placed upon people that is independent of divine revelation. But according to Scripture, it is the divine event of liberation in the lives of the oppressed that makes covenant-obedience possible. To live as a Christian simply means being what God has made us, namely, liberated creatures committed to the freedom of humanity.</p>
<p class="indent">Therefore the answer to the ethical question “What am I to do?” can be stated simply: be a liberator of Christ, because that is what you are! But then how does this work out in one's concrete social existence? How do I begin to develop criteria of ethical judgment? We begin answering this question by stating once more: because the oppressed community is the place where one encounters God's liberating deed, it is also the only place where one can know the will of God. We cannot be what we are apart from what God has done and is doing in the oppressed community. Thus the criteria of ethical judgment can only be hammered out in the community of the victims of injustice. But since God's will does not come in the form of absolute principles applicable for all situations, our obedience to the divine will involves the risk of faith. The risk of faith means that the oppressed are not infallible. They often do not do the will of God which they know, and do not know the will of God which they proclaim. Thus being a member of the oppressed community does not grant one immunity from error and sin. However, it can grant one the <a id="page_191"/>knowledge that God is present with them in struggle despite their frailty. God takes their meager actions and transforms them into liberating signs that the divine kingdom is coming. This knowledge lets the oppressed know that what they do is not in vain. From a relationship with the divine One and with the little ones who have encountered God in struggle, Christians are granted the risk of faith to hammer out the meaning of ethical obedience in the social context of human existence. Thus the difference between Christian ethics and non-Christian ethics does not lie in particular acts but in the <i>source</i> from which the acts arise. For Christians, Jesus is the source for what we do; without his power to make life human, our behavior would count as nothing. For Jesus is the criterion of our ethical judgment. We do not simply ask, “What would Jesus do?” as if he is an ethical principle to be applied without the risk of faith. We ask, “What is he doing <i>now</i> in America and elsewhere to heal the sick and to liberate the prisoners?” This is not an easy question. Therefore our answer to that question must be tested by <i>other</i> oppressed people who are involved in the struggle of freedom. We must carve out the answer for every new situation <i>in dialogue</i> with Scripture and tradition, as well as with other victims in our social existence. But even this dialogue does not grant the certainty of the truth of our answer. The only certainty we are permitted to know is that the Scripture claims that Jesus will be with us in our struggles. And for those who have met him, this divine promise is enough to hold them together so that they can fight to make the world a humane place to live.</p>
<p class="indent">The grounding of Christian ethics in the oppressed community means that the oppressor cannot decide what is Christian behavior. Intuitively and experientially black slaves recognized this basic truth, because their mental and physical survival was at stake. They rejected the white masters’ view of morality, but they did not reject <i>law</i> and <i>morality</i>. Rather, they formulated a <i>new</i> law and a <i>new</i> morality that was consistent with black strivings for freedom. Right and wrong were not abstract philosophical truths but existential and historical realities defined by black survival and liberation in the social context of servitude. For black slaves, to do the right thing was to do what was necessary to stay alive in bondage with dignity. It had little to do with intellectual discussions about Immanuel Kant's categorical imperative or John Stuart Mill's utilitarianism. Black slaves did not discuss the logic of ethical theory but created ethical structures for <a id="page_192"/>behavior in the struggle for survival. What sense would it make for black people to talk about an absolutist ethic in relation to stealing with people who stole them from Africa and enslaved them in North America? Thus black slaves made a distinction between “stealing” and “taking.” Stealing meant taking from a fellow slave, and slave ethics did not condone that. But to take from white folks was not wrong, because they were merely appropriating what was in fact rightfully theirs. Olmstead reports an incident that clarifies the distinction.</p>
<p class="block">A housemaid who had the reputation of being especially devout was suspected by her mistress of having stolen from her bureau several trinkets. She was charged with the theft, and vociferously denied it. She was watched and the articles discovered openly displayed on her person as she went to church. She still on her return, denied having them—was searched and they were found in her pockets. When reproached by her mistress and lectured on the wickedness of lying and stealing, she replied with the confident air of knowing the ground she stood upon, “…don't say I'm wicked…its alright for us poor colored people to appropriate whatever white folks’ blessings the Lord puts in our way.”<sup><a href="notes.xhtml#ch09-fnr16" id="ch09-fn16">16</a></sup></p>
<p class="indent1">Few slaves regarded “stealing” from white people as ethically wrong, because white people were not a part of their community. Indeed, whites were the enemy whom the slaves had to struggle against in order to survive. Blacks did not believe that they were morally bound to people who had reduced them to servitude. An ex-slave, Charles Ball, put it this way:</p>
<p class="block">I was never acquainted with a slave who believed that he violated any rule of morality by appropriating to himself anything that belonged to his master if it was necessary to his comfort. The master might call it theft and brand it with the name of crime; but the slave reasoned differently when he took a portion of his master's goods to satisfy his hunger, keep himself warm, or to gratify his passion for luxurious enjoyment.<sup><a href="notes.xhtml#ch09-fnr17" id="ch09-fn17">17</a></sup></p>
<p class="body-text1">The idea that many slaves did not feel themselves bound to white morality is a prominent theme in folklore. When the master found out <a id="page_193"/>that one of his yearlings had been taken, he told the black preacher to preach “hell out of the congregation that Sunday so whoever stole that yea'ling would confess having it.” John revealed his ethical disposition toward his master when he said:</p>
<p class="blockz">“Mr. Preacher, I understand you to say, Judgement Day, the man who stole Old Marster's yea'ling will be there, Old Marster will be there, yea'ling will be there, yea'ling will be staring you in the face.”</p>
<p class="block_i">Preacher says, “That's right.”</p>
<p class="block_i">John replied then, “Let Old Marster git his yea'ling on Judgement Day. That'll be time enough.”<sup><a href="notes.xhtml#ch09-fnr18" id="ch09-fn18">18</a></sup></p>
<p class="indent1">Another essential ingredient of slave ethics was deception. To survive in an oppressive society, it is necessary to outsmart the oppressors, and to make them think you are what you <i>know</i> you are not. Oppressors like happy slaves, especially so-called Christian oppressors. They do not like “uppity” slaves, those who openly expressed their discontentment with servitude. Thus the slaves’ survival was sometimes dependent upon their ability to make slave masters believe that they accepted their limitations as an authentic form of slave existence. As Henry Bibb said: “The only weapon of self defense, I could use successfully, was that of deception.”<sup><a href="notes.xhtml#ch09-fnr19" id="ch09-fn19">19</a></sup> The same theme is echoed by Lusford Lane:</p>
<p class="block">Ever after I entertained the first idea of being free, I had endeavored so to conduct myself as not to become obnoxious to the white inhabitants, knowing as I did their power, and their hostility to the colored people. The two points necessary in such a case I had kept constantly in mind. First, I had made no display of the little property or money I possessed, but in every way I wore as much as possible the aspects of slavery. Second, I had never appeared to be even so intelligent as I really was. This all colored people at the south, free and slave, find it peculiarly necessary for their comfort and safety to observe.<sup><a href="notes.xhtml#ch09-fnr20" id="ch09-fn20">20</a></sup></p>
<p class="indent1">The theme of deception is also found in folklore and the songs of black slaves. When blacks sang about heaven and told tales about Br'er Rabbit, most whites did not know that they were sometimes <a id="page_194"/>referring to Africa and Canada and the need of black slaves to outwit the power of white masters. Whites believed what they wanted to believe, and they wanted to believe that blacks were contented. As one former Mississippian put it: “They find themselves first existing in this state, and pass through life without questioning the justice of their allotment, which, if they think at all, they suppose a natural one.”<sup><a href="notes.xhtml#ch09-fnr21" id="ch09-fn21">21</a></sup> What he failed to understand was that contentment was a form of survival, and slaves often said what the master wanted to hear while thinking other thoughts.</p>
<p class="indent">Black people's limitation of ethics to their community and using deception in relation to white people does not mean that they reduce moral behavior to absolute relativity. It only means that liberation is not a theoretical principle. Liberation is a reality to be created and defined in struggle. Sometimes it may mean standing one's ground and shouting, as Stokely Carmichael once did, “Hell no, we won't go!” Then again it might mean saying, as many slaves did, “No massa, me no want to be free, have good massa, take care of me when I sick, never ’buse nigger; no me no want to be free.”<sup><a href="notes.xhtml#ch09-fnr22" id="ch09-fn22">22</a></sup> Both statements can be valid. The decision must be made by the oppressed, engaged in life-or-death struggle. Both affirmations can be wrong if they are used for selfish gains without regard to the oppressed community. The absolute to which these statements ought to refer is the freedom of the oppressed. Everything else is secondary. When slaves say, “No massa, me no want to be free,” to be true to black life, it must be a deception, a trick to survive for the moment so that they can later say, “Hell no, we won't go!” If slaves fail to say the latter to themselves and their community at the same time the former is being articulated in the presence of whites, then it is likely that they have internalized what they are not. This is always a danger because the risks of freedom are so great. Thus to be true to the ethic of liberation, the “no massa” syndrome must be a temporary deception and its authenticity clearly dependent upon what is to follow—the “hell no” syndrome. But when slaves say the latter, they must have their “shit together” and be ready to do battle with the powers of evil. For the oppressors will not grant freedom merely through shouting revolutionary slogans. The oppressed must have the power to take it.</p>
<p class="indent">What we are to do, therefore, is not decided by abstract principles but is defined by Jesus’ liberating presence in our community. The oppressed community is the place where we are called to hammer out <a id="page_195"/>the meaning of Jesus’ presence for Christian behavior. This is a risk of faith, because there are no universal guarantees that our decision will be ethically consistent with our freedom in Christ. Therefore we must be in constant dialogue with each other about what we should and should not do in the struggle. No brother or sister can claim to have the whole truth and nothing but the truth. People can only bear witness to the truth they know, always remaining open for further instruction on the truth from other brothers and sisters. When any brother or sister claims to speak the <i>last</i> word about our struggle, we can be sure that he or she is misguided. This guideline applies to Christians and non-Christians, integrationists and nationalists. We may speak to and about white oppressors in that manner as if there could be no doubt about our actions, because they do not deserve our trust or respect. And they probably would not know it if they received it. But in the black community, where everyone bears the scars of struggle, and everyone will have to bear the consequences of a particular course of action, there can be no popes who speak <i>ex cathedra</i> on the matter of black liberation. To be sure, there are leaders but <i>not</i> self-appointed ones. They must be chosen by the people and thus accountable to the people. This accountability is disclosed in the leader's recognition of his or her fallibility. The function of the leader is to lead the people toward a collective action for the struggle of all. Here is where true liberation ethics is born. What we are called to be and do is revealed in relation to each other in the common struggle of freedom. We may not always agree on a common action in regard to the means of liberation. But our common knowledge that we are enslaved by the structures of injustice binds us together and forces us to fight the good fight so that our children will have a more humane place in which to live.</p>
<p class="indent">Black people must be watchful of leaders that do not recognize their fallibility. Thus it is the people's task to inform these self-appointed prophets that their lack of openness to other perspectives on liberation renders them inoperative in the struggle. Their close-mindedness is a shameful display of their failure to take black people's humanity seriously; it shows contempt for the very community they claim to represent. We must tell them that their behavior is no different from that of white people who always think and act as if they are divine. These persons must be made to know that they do not represent the community, and the only people who <a id="page_196"/>can tell them are black people themselves. Leadership is born in struggle and conferred by the community engaged in liberation. Leadership is not conferred by private revelations or visions. One is not called to do a task through ESP but by the community itself, because they see a certain person especially equipped for a particular task. And it is not always a person who has been in the depths of the community's struggle.</p>
<p class="indent">We can create our ethic only in dialogue in the struggle of freedom. Anyone who lacks respect for the people's intelligence and has to assume that he or she knows everything, because of college and graduate degrees, does not deserve the people's trust. We black theologians and preachers must be especially sensitive to this point. It is easy for us to think that just because we have read Barth and Tillich or Henry Garnet and David Walker we know what is best for the people. It is easy for us to think that because we know more about the language and origin of biblical writings, we also know more about the gospel of Jesus. Not so! Black people learned a long time ago that there is no connection between education and Christian living. That much they picked up from observing white people who intellectually knew much about God but whose behavior made them children of the devil. We must be careful that we do not fall into the same trap as our oppressors when we are involved in the life of the community. We must be <i>truly</i> open to hearing and seeing the truth, even though it is not expressed in language learned in seminary. We must unlearn our slavery to the conceptualization of words and begin to see the black manifestation of truth in the rhythm of black life. It may be revealed when a deacon lines a hymn or when a beautiful sister struts down the aisle of the church, knowing that God was in a good mood when she was created. That is a theological truth you have to see in order to appreciate, for it is difficult to express this reality in words. To see black sisters and brothers relate to each other in community as they feel and touch each other with love means that white sexual morality should not and cannot apply to us. What it must be can only be hammered out in dialogue with each other, respecting each other's personhood. There is no place for male dominance of females. There can only be mutual respect and equality, an equality of power defined in the context of struggle. The task of the black ethicist is to formulate our values so that we can measure our behavior in relation to our proclamations.</p>
<a id="page_197"/>
<p class="indent">We must probe our history, deep into its African roots, and ask about the relationship between the African shout and the Baptist moan, the river of Jordan in the spirituals and the river spirits of West African religion. What is the relationship of African behavior and slave behavior? In what sense did our survival in slavery depend upon liberating structures of behavior derived from Africa? And to what extent does our survival today depend upon our recognition of the essential African structure of our lives and the building of the liberation program upon that structure? A black Christian ethic cannot ignore the fact that we are an African people, and that heritage must be recognized in ethical analysis if we are going to suggest moral directions to black people that do not violate the very substance of our being. The exact extent that African culture should play in the black analysis of ethics is still being debated.<sup><a href="notes.xhtml#ch09-fnr23" id="ch09-fn23">23</a></sup> But there should be no debate that we are an African People and not European, even though we may not agree upon the fullest meaning of that affirmation. The meaning will emerge in struggle, as it should.</p>
<p class="indent">Another important element in a black Christian ethic is openness to people who are struggling for black freedom but whose perspective is non-Christian or even anti-Christian. I believe that Jesus Christ is at the heart of the black experience in North America. When black people's “road got rocky” and the “way became narrow,” they told Jesus about it. He was the <i>ethical</i> difference in their lives that enabled them “to press on to higher ground.” I believe that it was Jesus who gave slave preachers the power to proclaim freedom as the essence of the gospel. “Free indeed,” Henry Clay Bruce recalls a black preacher saying, “free from death, free from hell, free from work, free from white folks, free from everything.”<sup><a href="notes.xhtml#ch09-fnr24" id="ch09-fn24">24</a></sup> However, other blacks—rationalist or existentialist intellectuals, Marxians, Muslims, nationalists, and others—often claim that Christianity retards the struggle for freedom. They rightly observe that the name of Jesus was on the lips of slaveholders, too. These people, in the view of black Christians, are mistaken in putting black and white Christianity in the same boat. Black people took the Jesus that white people knew by name only and reinterpreted him in the light of the Bible, Africa, and the struggle in North America. The difference between black Christians and other blacks must not be permitted to weaken the struggle. The dialogue on how to approach this issue must remain open. Christians must not beat nationalists over the head with Jesus, and neither should <a id="page_198"/>nationalists turn their noses up at black Christians. It matters little to white oppressors whether we are nationalists or Christians. As brother Malcolm X taught us:</p>
<p class="block">What you and I need to do is to forget our differences. When we come together, we don't come together as Baptists or Methodists. You don't catch hell because you are a Baptist, and you don't catch hell because you're a Methodist or Baptist, you don't catch hell because you're a Democrat or a Republican, you don't catch hell because you're a Mason or an Elk, and you sure don't catch hell because you're an American; because if you were an American, you wouldn't catch hell. You catch hell because you're a black man. You catch hell, all of us catch hell for the same reason.<sup><a href="notes.xhtml#ch09-fnr25" id="ch09-fn25">25</a></sup></p>
<p class="indent1">Malcolm's message is still true today. The crucial point is that we are <i>black</i>, and that fact alone ought to keep us open to each other, not for the purpose of conversion, but for shared participation in finding out the best means of struggle. This openness is the crux of our authentic recognition of each other as brothers and sisters.</p>
<p class="indent">The logical extension of the failure to be open to each other leads to that phenomenon that is so detrimental to our struggle and pleasing to white people—namely, blacks killing blacks. We can destroy each other mentally and physically, because we are afraid to deal with the real oppressive forces in our community. Thus the drug-pushers, the pimps, and other self-seeking persons are detrimental to our struggle. When we kill each other with drugs and guns, that means that we are doing the oppressor's job. This phenomenon is the result of mental enslavement to the values that are meant to destroy us. Therefore at the same time that we must create ethical structures that will help us fight white oppressors, we must also find ways to create a black society that makes pimps and drug-pushers a thing of the past. This can be done by destroying white oppressive structures that create the conditions which make it so easy for blacks to kill and maim each other. Here we need all the available resources in the black community for the waging of war against all forces that seek to destroy us. The black ethicists must help to create the dialogue in the black community so that we can move toward the freedom that will appear only if we take the risk to claim it.</p>
<a id="page_199"/>
<p class="indent">White oppressors must be excluded from this black ethical dialogue, because they cannot be trusted. To those whites who continually proclaim their goodwill, despite the long history of racism, the most blacks can say is: “There may be a place for you, but you will have to do what we say, without suggesting that you know what is best for our liberation.” Few if any whites can accept this. They will say that it is neither fair nor Christian. But we do not need to debate the meaning of fairness or Christianity with our oppressors. For they, of all people, have not earned the right even to utter these words. Our task is to be what we are in spite of white people, because we have seen the vision of freedom, and it is calling us to put the world in shape.</p>
<p class="head" id="sub3"><b>ETHICS, VIOLENCE, AND JESUS CHRIST</b></p>
<p class="indent1">With an authentic ethic of liberation as our point of departure, it is now possible to say a word about violence. Because the oppressed have been victims of mental and physical dehumanization, we cannot make the destruction of humanity, even among oppressors, an end in itself. Such a procedure contradicts the struggle of freedom, the essence of our striving. Our intention is not to make the oppressors the slaves but to transform humanity, or, in the words of Fanon, “set afoot a new [humanity].” Thus hatred and vengeance have no place in the struggle of freedom. Indeed, hatred is a denial of freedom, a usurpation of the liberation struggle. The ethic of liberation arises out of love, for ourselves and for humanity. This is an essential ingredient of liberation without which the struggle turns into a denial of what divine liberation means.</p>
<p class="indent">However, the radical rejection of hatred and vengeance does not mean that we accept white people's analysis of violence and nonviolence. We are well aware that they derive their analysis of these terms from a theological and political interest that supports the status quo, whereas we must analyze them in accordance with our struggle to be free. We cannot let white rhetoric about nonviolence and Jesus distort our vision of violence committed against black people. Therefore, one of the tasks of the black ethicist is to untangle the confused and much discussed problem of violence and nonviolence and Jesus’ relationship to both. At least three points ought to be made.</p>
<p class="indent">(1) Violence is not only what black people do to white people as victims seek to change the structure of their existence; it is also what <a id="page_200"/>white people <i>did</i> when they created a society for white people only, and what they <i>do</i> in order to maintain it. Violence in America did not begin with the black power movement or with the Black Panther Party. Neither is it limited to the Symbionese Liberation Army. Contrary to popular white opinion, violence has a long history in America. This country was born in violent revolution (remember 1776?), and it has been sustained by the violent extermination of red people and the violent enslavement of black people. This is what Rap Brown had in mind when he said that “Violence is as American as cherry pie.”</p>
<p class="indent">White people have a distorted conception of the meaning of violence. They like to think of violence as breaking the laws of their society, but that is a narrow and racist understanding of reality. There is a more deadly form of violence, and it is camouflaged in such slogans as “law and order,” “freedom and democracy,” and “the American way of life.” I am speaking of white-collar violence, the violence of Christian murderers and patriot citizens who define right in terms of whiteness and wrong as blackness. These are the people who hire assassins to do their dirty work while they piously congratulate themselves for being “good” and “nonviolent.” The assassins are the police who patrol our streets, killing our men, women, and children.</p>
<p class="indent">I contend, therefore, that the problem of violence is not the problem of a few black revolutionaries but the problem of a whole social structure which outwardly appears to be ordered and respectable but inwardly is “ridden by psychopathic obsessions and delusions”<sup><a href="notes.xhtml#ch09-fnr26" id="ch09-fn26">26</a></sup>—racism and hatred. Violence is embedded in American law, and it is blessed by the keepers of moral sanctity. This is the core of the problem of violence, and it will not be solved by romanticizing American history, pretending that Hiroshima, Nagasaki, and Vietnam are the first American crimes against humanity. If we take seriously the idea of human dignity, then we know that the annihilation of Indians, the enslavement of Africans, and (Reinhold Niebuhr notwithstanding) the making of heroes out of slaveholders, like George Washington and Thomas Jefferson, were America's first crimes against humankind. And it does not help the matter at all to attribute black slavery to economic necessity or an accident of history. America is an unjust society, and black people have known that for a long time.</p>
<p class="indent">(2) If violence is not just a question for the oppressed but <i>primarily</i> for the oppressors, then it is obvious that the distinction between violence and nonviolence is an illusory problem. “There is only the <a id="page_201"/>question of the justified and unjustified use of force and the question of whether the means are proportionate to the ends”;<sup><a href="notes.xhtml#ch09-fnr27" id="ch09-fn27">27</a></sup> and the only people who can answer the problem are the victims of injustice. It would be the height of stupidity for the victims of oppression to expect the oppressors to devise the means of liberation.</p>
<p class="indent">It is important to point out that no one can be nonviolent in an unjust society. The essential fallacy of the much debated issues of violence versus nonviolence is that the proponents of the latter have merely argued that issue from a perspective that accepted the oppressors’ definitions. Too often Christian theologians have made the specious distinction between violence and force. “The state is invested with force; it is an organism instituted and ordained by God, and remains such even when it is unjust; even its harshest acts are not the same thing as the angry or brutal deed of the individual. The individual surrenders his passions, he commits violence.”<sup><a href="notes.xhtml#ch09-fnr28" id="ch09-fn28">28</a></sup> This distinction is false and merely expresses an identification with the structures of power rather than with the victims of power. I contend that everyone is violent, and to ask, “Are you nonviolent?” is to accept the oppressors’ values. Concretely, ours is a situation in which the only option we have is that of deciding whose violence we will support—that of the oppressors or the oppressed. Either we side with oppressed blacks and other unwanted minorities as they try to redefine the meaning of existence in a dehumanized society, or we take a stand with the President or whoever is defending the white establishment for General Motors and U.S. Steel. There is no possibility of neutrality, the moral luxury of being on neither side. Neither the powers that be nor their victims will allow that! The U.S. government demands support through taxes and the public allegiance to the American flag. The oppressed demand commitment to the struggle of freedom and the willingness to take the risk to create a new humanity. We know that “sometimes [we are] tossed and driven,” and “sometimes [we] don't know where to roam.” But we've “heard of a city” where “Jesus is the King,” and we are struggling “to make it [our] home.” Sometimes the city is called heaven, and we speak of it as “crossing the river Jordan” and as the “New Jerusalem.” But this vision is the guide to our revolutionary fight to make this world a sign of its coming reality. People who want to join our struggle must relinquish their commitment to the structures of injustice. They cannot be for us and oppressors at the same time.</p>
<a id="page_202"/>
<p class="indent">Of course, I realize that the choice for the oppressed has its own ambiguities. Insofar as we pay taxes and work in the system, are we not on the side of the oppressors? True enough. Well then, what is the difference between President Gerald Ford and any black person? The difference is analogous to the distinction between the redeemed sinner and the unredeemed sinner. Ford is the latter, and the oppressed person in struggle of freedom is the former. One recognizes that, despite one's participation in it, the world is unjust, and one must be committed to its liberation. The other believes that the world is in good hands, and he enjoys his participation in it. This distinction is crucial, because one participation is by force and the other is voluntary. Thus the hope for the creation of a new society for all is dependent upon those people who know that struggle is the primary means by which a new age will be inaugurated. If they participate in injustice, they know that it is not right, and thus the system must be changed. There will be no change from the system of injustice if we have to depend upon the people who control it and believe that the present order of injustice is the best of all possible societies. It will be changed by the victims whose participation in the present system is against their will. Indeed, while they are participating in it involuntarily, <i>voluntarily</i> they are preparing for its destruction. They are living double lives, one part of which they are seeking to destroy because it contradicts the true self that is being made anew in struggle. Every sensitive black person knows what this means, and it is the source both of our being and not-being. Ethics in this context is a terrible risk, an existential and historical burden that must be borne in the heat of the day. It is this burden that made our ancestors create songs of sorrow and joy. Both realities are combined in this spiritual:</p>
<p class="para1">Nobody knows the trouble I've seen,</p>
<p class="para">Nobody knows my sorrow.</p>
<p class="para">Nobody knows the trouble I've seen,</p>
<p class="para">Glory, Hallelujah!</p>
<p class="body-text1">At Macedonia A.M.E. Church, this spiritual was repeatedly sung as an expression of the people's struggle. Du Bois’ “twoness,” the American and the Negro, the sorrow and the joy, was present in the very fabric of their existence. But this conflict did not create passivity; it was used by the people as the means of struggle. They <a id="page_203"/>put into action the saying that “you got to take what you got and use what you can,” and that they did every chance they got. It is this <i>living</i> truth embodied in the lives of black people that makes the comparison of President Ford's predicament with blacks’ utterly ridiculous. Oppressed blacks and other people of color are the only signs of hope for the creation of a new humanity in America.</p>
<p class="indent">From the foregoing analysis of violence and nonviolence, it is obvious that I do not share Martin Luther King, Jr.'s explication of this issue, although I agreed with much of the actual programmatic thrust of his leadership. His dependence on the analysis of love found in liberal theology and his confidence that “the universe is on the side of justice”<sup><a href="notes.xhtml#ch09-fnr29" id="ch09-fn29">29</a></sup> seem not to take seriously white violence in America. I disagreed with his conceptual analysis of violence versus nonviolence, because his distinctions between these terms did not appear to face head-on the historical and sociological complexities of human existence in a racist society. Thus much of King's writings reflect theological and philosophical discourse that had little to do with his actual creative thinking and acting. The source of the latter is not Gandhi or Boston personalism, despite his implied claims to the contrary. King's creative thought and power in the struggle of freedom were found in his black Church heritage. This was the heritage that brought him face to face with agony and despair but also hope and joy that somewhere in the bosom of God's eternity, justice would become a reality “in the land of the free and the home of the brave.” This was the source of King's dream and his anticipation that “trouble won't last always.” With black sermonic style and rhythm and with theological imagination, he attempted to explicate the content of his vision: “I have a dream,” he said at the March on Washington in 1963, “that one day my children will no longer be judged by the color of their skin but by the content of their character.” And the night before his assassination in Memphis, he reiterated a similar hope: “I may not get there with you, but I want you to know tonight that we as a people will get to the promised land.” The idea that hope is created in the context of despair and oppression is what made King such a creative activist and a great preacher and theologian. It is also what makes my theology very similar to King's, despite our apparent difference on violence and nonviolence. For we both recognize that a fight is on and black survival and liberation are at stake. Therefore, we do not need to debate the relative merits of certain academic <a id="page_204"/>distinctions between violence and force or violence and nonviolence. The task is what King demonstrated so well in his life and thought, to try to replace inhumanity with humanity.</p>
<p class="indent">(3) If violence versus nonviolence is not the issue but, rather, the creation of a new humanity, then the critical question for Christians is not whether Jesus committed violence or whether violence is theoretically consistent with love and reconciliation. We repeat: the question is not what Jesus <i>did</i>, as if his behavior in first-century Palestine were the infallible ethical guide for our actions today. We must ask not what he did, but what is he <i>doing</i>—and what he did becomes important only insofar as it points to his activity today. To use the Jesus of history as an absolute ethical guide for people today is to become enslaved to the past, foreclosing God's eschatological future and its judgment on the present. It removes the element of risk in ethical decisions and makes people slaves to principles. But the gospel of Jesus means liberation; and one essential element of that liberation is the existential burden of making decisions about human liberation without being completely sure what Jesus did or would do. This is the risk of faith.</p>
<p class="indent">My difficulty with white theologians is their use of Jesus’ so-called “nonviolent” attitude in the Gospels as primary evidence that the oppressed ought to be nonviolent today.<sup><a href="notes.xhtml#ch09-fnr30" id="ch09-fn30">30</a></sup> Not only have Rudolf Bultmann and other Form Critics demonstrated that there are historical difficulties in the attempt to move behind the kerygmatic preaching of the early Church to the real Jesus of Nazareth, but the procedure is ethically questionable, especially from white defenders of the status quo. It is interesting that many white scholars are skeptical about the historical validity of practically everything that the Gospels record about Jesus’ ministry <i>except</i> his political involvement. They are sure that he preached love, which they invariably interpret to mean an acceptance of the political status quo. His gospel, they contend, was spiritual or eschatological but had nothing to do with political, revolutionary struggle. This is a strange form of logic, especially since they are the same scholars who adhere <i>rigidly</i> to the form-critical method and also <i>universally</i> proclaim that the Kingdom about which Jesus preached included the whole of reality. Why is it that they do not express the same skepticism when dealing with Jesus’ politics as they do with everything else? How can they be so sure that Jesus was not violent? Why is it that they say that Jesus preached the Kingdom, <i>an <a id="page_205"/>all-encompassing reality</i>, but suggest that it had nothing to do with politics? How can they say that the God of Jesus was Yahweh of the Old Testament, but shy away from his political involvement on behalf of the oppressed? How could Jesus be God's representative on earth, and not be concerned about social, economic, and political injustice? I think the answer to these questions is obvious. White theologians’ exegesis is decided by their commitment to, and involvement in, the social structures of oppression. They cannot see the radical and political thrust of Jesus’ person and work because their vision is committed to the very structures that Jesus despised. They are the contemporary representatives of the scribes and lawyers who cannot recognize the essential fallacy of their perspective.</p>
<p class="indent">However, even if it could be shown that Jesus was not a revolutionary zealot, that in itself would not be evidence that the risen Christ is not involved in the oppressed's struggle of freedom today. For the resurrected Christ is not bound by first-century possibilities. Though the Jesus of yesterday is important for our ethical decisions today, we must be careful where we locate that importance. It is not found in following in his steps, slavishly imitating his behavior in Palestine. Rather, we must regard his past activity as a <i>pointer</i> to what he is doing now. His actions were not as much examples as <i>signs</i> of God's eschatological future and the divine will to liberate all people from slavery and oppression. In Jesus’ exorcisms and in his eating and drinking with the oppressed, he was pointing to the new age that was breaking into the present, disrupting the order of injustice. The new age of the coming Kingdom means a revolutionary usurpation of the present value system. The last shall be first and the first last. Herein is the ethical import of Jesus’ words and deeds. They were concrete <i>signs</i> that the new age is dawning right in the social context of the people. They mean nothing to those who do not have the eyes of faith to see that something revolutionary is taking place in the midst of the people. The truth of Jesus’ ethical presence is not found through a rational investigation of his deeds or words. It is found in what they bear witness to, namely, God's will to liberate the weak and the helpless.</p>
<p class="indent">Therefore if we today want to understand the meaning of Jesus’ past existence in relation to his present existence with us, we must approach the problem not with the method of philosophy but from that perspective of faith which arises from the dispossessed, because <a id="page_206"/>their social existence bears witness to the vision of a coming new age. As Christians, who have seen the signs of the liberating Kingdom, we are commanded not to follow philosophical principles but to discover the will of God in a troubled and dehumanized world. Concretely, we must decide not between good and evil, right and wrong, but between the old and the new age, the former being represented in the oppressors and the latter in the struggle of the little ones to be free. We must ask and answer the question, “Whose actions, those of the oppressed or the oppressors, are consistent with God's work in history?” Either we believe God's will to be revealed in the status quo of America or in the actions of those who seek to change it.</p>
<p class="indent">Accepting the risk of faith and the ethical burden of making decisions about life and death without an infallible guide, I contend that God is found among the poor, the wretched, and the sick. “God chose what is foolish in the world to shame the wise [wrote Paul], God chose what is weak in the world to shame the strong, God chose what is low and despised in the world, even the things that are not, to bring to nothing things that are…” (I Cor. 1:26 f. <small>RSV</small>). That was why God elected Israelite slaves and not Egyptian slave masters, the weak and poor in Israel and not the oppressors. As the Gospels’ portrayal of Jesus demonstrates, the God of Israel is the God whose will is made known through God's identification with the oppressed and God's activity is always identical with those who strive for a liberated freedom.</p>
<p class="indent">If this message means anything for our times, it means that God's revelation is found in black liberation. God has chosen what is black in America to shame the whites. In a society where white is equated with good and black is defined as bad, humanity and divinity mean an unqualified identification with blackness. The divine election of the oppressed means that black people are given the power of judgment over the high and mighty whites. What else can a Christian ethic say than that the oppressed in struggle are the concrete signs of God's presence with us today?</p>
</div>
</body>
</html>