<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>chapter07</title>
<link href="ebook_style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
<meta content="urn:uuid:5bf1d25e-4978-4604-b0f7-22d24fac0880" name="Adept.expected.resource"/>
</head>
<body>
<div>
<a id="page_127"/>
<h2 class="chap_tit"><span class="underline">CHAPTER 7</span></h2>
<p class="chapz"><b>The Meaning of Liberation</b></p>
<p class="indent">If Jesus Christ, in his past, present and future, reveals that the God of Scripture and tradition is the God whose will is disclosed in the liberation of oppressed people from bondage, what then is the meaning of liberation? In answering the question we begin by examining the theological presupposition upon which that meaning is based.</p>
<p class="head" id="sub1"><b>JESUS CHRIST AS THE GROUND OF HUMAN LIBERATION</b></p>
<p class="indent">Because human liberation is God's work of salvation in Jesus Christ, its source and meaning cannot be separated from Christology's sources (Scripture, tradition, and social existence) and content (Jesus in his past, present, and future). Jesus Christ, therefore, in his humanity and divinity, is the point of departure for a black theologian's analysis of the meaning of liberation. There is no liberation independent of Jesus’ past, present, and future coming. He is the ground of our present freedom to struggle and the source of our hope that the vision disclosed in our historical fight against oppression will be fully realized in God's future. In this sense, liberation is not a human possession but a divine gift of freedom to those who struggle in faith against violence and oppression. Liberation is not an object but the <i>project</i> of freedom wherein the oppressed realize that their fight for freedom is a divine right of creation. This is what Anthony Burns, an ex-slave, meant by saying that “God made me a <i>man</i>—not a <i>slave</i>, and gave me the same right to myself that he gave to the man stole me to himself.”<sup><a href="notes.xhtml#ch07-fnr1" id="ch07-fn1">1</a></sup> A similar point was made by David Walker when he urged black slaves to remember that freedom is not a gift from white slave masters but a natural right of divine creation.</p>
<a id="page_128"/>
<p class="block">Should tyrants take it into their heads to emancipate any of you, remember that your freedom is your natural right. You are men, as well as they, and instead of returning thanks to them for your freedom, return it to the Holy Ghost, who is your rightful owner. If they do not want to part with your labors,…and my word for it, that God Almighty will break their strong band.<sup><a href="notes.xhtml#ch07-fnr2" id="ch07-fn2">2</a></sup></p>
<p class="indent1">The grounding of liberation in God's act in Jesus Christ is the logical consequence of any Christian theology that takes Scripture seriously as an important source for the doing of theology. According to Scripture, the human freedom to hope for a new heaven and a new earth is grounded in God's freedom. Divine freedom is not merely an affirmation of the self-existence and complete transcendence of God over creaturely existence. It also expresses God's will to be in relation to creatures in the social context of their striving for the fulfillment of humanity. That is, God is free to be for us. This is the meaning of the Exodus and the Incarnation. The biblical God is the God whose salvation is liberation. God is the God of Jesus Christ who calls the helpless and weak into a newly created existence. God not only fights for them but takes their humiliated condition upon the divine Person and thereby breaks open a new future for the poor, different from their past and present miseries. Here is the central meaning of the cross, dramatically revealed in the Markan account of Jesus’ cry of dereliction: “My God, my God, why hast thou forsaken me?” (15:34). These words show the depth of Jesus’ agony and the pain of being abandoned by his Father. But because he was one with divinity and humanity, the pain of the cross was God suffering for and with us so that our humanity can be liberated for freedom in the divine struggle against oppression. This is why Ernst Käsemann says that “Jesus means freedom,” and why Moltmann is correct in his contention that “the Christian faith not only believes in freedom but is already freedom itself. It not only hopes for freedom but, rather, is itself the inauguration of a free life on earth.”<sup><a href="notes.xhtml#ch07-fnr3" id="ch07-fn3">3</a></sup></p>
<p class="indent">When God is revealed in history as freedom for us, he is disclosed as the God of hope. “Christian theology,” writes Moltmann, “speaks of history <i>eschatologically</i>.”<sup><a href="notes.xhtml#ch07-fnr4" id="ch07-fn4">4</a></sup> To speak of history eschatologically is to speak of the promise of God's Word of liberation, disclosed in God's future, breaking into our present, and overthrowing the powers of evil that hold people in captivity. This theme is prominent in the <a id="page_129"/>black religious tradition with its claim that Jesus has not left black people alone in suffering. He is not only with them, “buildin’ them up where they are torn down and proppin’ them up on every leanin’ side,” but he is also “coming on the clouds of heaven” to take them “home to glory.” Black people's faith in Jesus’ future coming is the basis of their continued struggle against inexplicable evil in their present existence. They often expressed their faith in testimony. When the burdens of life became difficult and they could not offer a rational explanation of the pain they had to bear, the members of Macedonia could still affirm the meaning they found in black life. It might be expressed in language like this: “Sometimes the way gets difficult, and I don't know what to do. The burden of life gets heavy, and I often feel that I can't go anymore. But I tell you this <i>one</i> thing: I <i>know</i> that my Lord is coming again, and I want to be ready to put on my shoes, fasten up my robe, and walk around Zion. That's why I can't let a little trouble get me down. I can't quit, because I want to see my Jesus. ‘O yes I'm going to eat at the welcome table some of these days, hallelujah!’ ” The courage and the strength to keep on fighting in this world are based on the hope that “de udder worl’ is not like dis.”</p>
<p class="indent">Black people can fight for freedom and justice, because the One who is their future is also the ground of their struggle for liberation. It does not matter what oppressors say or do or what they try to make us out to be. We know that we have a freedom not made with human hands. It is this faith that defines our person, and thus enables black people to sing when the world says that they have nothing to sing about, to pray when prayer seems useless to theologians and philosophers, and to preach when the world will not listen. For black people's singing, praying, and preaching are not grounded in any human potentiality but in the actuality of God's freedom to be with the oppressed as disclosed in the cross and resurrection of Jesus. Jesus is their freedom, the One they claim will “pick you up when you're fallin’ and will come to your rescue when you're in trouble.” He is the One who gave our black mothers and fathers in slavery an “old time religion,” that moved their consciousness back to the shores of Africa, and thus enabled them to use the resources of their heritage in the struggle for freedom. They could shout and dance to the rhythm of freedom because Jesus is the Lord of all creation who gives the little ones liberating visions in wretched places. That is why black people call him a “Balm in Gilead” who came “to make the wounded whole” <a id="page_130"/>and “to heal the sin-sick soul.” With ecstatic praise they proclaim: “Lord, you've been so good to me. You stayed by my side when the world was against me. You are my rose of Sharon and the Prince of Peace,” the One who breaks into the people's history, bestowing meaning upon their past, giving them courage to struggle in the present, and the will to hope that one day, “in that great gettin’ up morning,” it will “all be over with, all over this world.”</p>
<p class="indent">Christ's salvation is liberation; there is no liberation without Christ. Both meanings are inherent in the statement that Jesus Christ is the ground of human liberation. Any statement that divorces salvation from liberation or makes human freedom independent of divine freedom must be rejected. From this starting point we proceed to examine the content of human liberation itself: as relation to God, as relation to self and community, as the practice of freedom in history and hope.</p>
<p class="head" id="sub2"><b>LIBERATION AS FREEDOM TO BE IN RELATION TO GOD</b></p>
<p class="indent">Fellowship with God is the beginning and the end of human liberation. The liberated person is the one who encounters God in faith, that is, in conviction and trust that one's true humanity is actualized in God. This vertical dimension of faith is the essential response to the gospel and is thus the heart of liberation's meaning from the human side. This is why conversion, prayer, and community worship are dominant motifs in black religion—when the people testify that they met Jesus “early one Thursday morning” or “late one Friday evening,” they are talking about the importance of the divine-human encounter. Seldom is the actual date, hour, or year very important, although some will claim that it is crucial to know when the Lord touched your soul. But theologically, the reality of conversion points to the vertical dimension of liberation which is often called “communion with God.”</p>
<p class="indent">The conversion experience in black religion is a radical, transforming encounter with the One the people believe to be the foundation of their existence. One person speaks of this experience as being “hooked in the heart.” Another says “God struck me dead,” while another testifies that she was “split open from head to foot.” In the classic text, <i>God Struck Me Dead</i>, edited by Clifton H. Johnson of Fisk University, testimonies to these experiences, have an essential commonality: they speak of a divine-human encounter that meant death to <a id="page_131"/>the old life and liberation to a new form of existence. One person put it this way:</p>
<p class="blockz">I was fifty-two years old when the Lord freed my soul…. I was killed dead and made live again….</p>
<p class="block_i">During the vision the voice said to me, “Here you must die.” I truly died and saw my body. I had a temporal and spiritual body. My spiritual body had six wings on it, and when I was barked at by the hellhounds of the devil I arose and flew away.</p>
<p class="block_i">Ever since the Lord freed my soul I have been a new man. I trust in him to fight my battles, for he is a captain who has never lost a battle or been confounded with cares.<sup><a href="notes.xhtml#ch07-fnr5" id="ch07-fn5">5</a></sup></p>
<p class="indent1">In a more humorous vein, the same theme of conversion and its liberating effect was expressed by a nineteenth-century preacher who exhorted his converts at the water's edge, awaiting the ceremony of baptism.</p>
<p class="block">My brethren and sistren, hark to my words. ’Tain't ’nuff dat you should have songs of thanksgivin’ on yo’ lips. ’Tain't ample dat you is shoutin’ out hallelujas an’ amens till yo’ throats is hoarse an’ yo’ voices break in de middle. No suh! Onlessen you got de spirit of de Lawd pressin’ heavy ’pon you an’ de ol'-time ’ligion in yo’ souls; onlessen you is filled wid happy hopes of de hereafter an’ fear of ol’ Satan; onlessen you feels dat de angels is lookin’ down on you wid favor from heaven above an’ dat cherubims is singin’ sweet praise fo’ yo’ salvation an’ de Pearly Gates is done swung wide open to welcome you ez worthy pilgrims an’ de golden harps is tuned fo’ you an’ yo’ wings is waitin’ to be fitted onto yo’ shoulders; onlessen you has all dese feelin's, you won't get nothin’ when you is immersed ’cept wet!<sup><a href="notes.xhtml#ch07-fnr6" id="ch07-fn6">6</a></sup></p>
<p class="indent1">After conversion, many blacks believe that prayer is needed in order to stay on what they call “the Lord's journey.” Prayer is being able to communicate with God and to know that God cares for them. Most black prayers begin with an expression of thankfulness to God for having sustained the people in struggle. “Dear Lawd, we come befo’ Thee and ask Thee ter stand by us. Thank Thee for ev'rything Thou's did for us.” Because black families were brutalized and broken <a id="page_132"/>by slavery and oppression, God became the stabilizing and liberating force in their lives. Thus in prayer, God is often referred to as a “mother for the motherless” and a “father for the fatherless.” God becomes everything that the people need in order to sustain their lives with dignity. He is the One that the people can “tell all about their troubles.” And in the act of telling one's story to God, fellowship with the divine is established, and thus believers become aware that God has not left them alone. Prayer is experiencing the power of God's presence and knowing that human liberation is based on divine revelation. This vertical sense of personal relationship with the God of Jesus is logically prior to the other components of human liberation. For without the knowledge of God that comes through divine fellowship, the oppressed would not know that what the world says about them is a lie. They would have to believe what they are <i>made</i> to believe through police sticks and guns. But if one has a relationship with the Resurrected One, then one can know that one has an identity that cannot be taken away with guns and bullets. This is what black people are affirming when they say: “Take it to the Lord in prayer.” Prayer, therefore, is not an escape that leads to passivity. Rather, it is the beginning of the Christian practice of liberation. It is not only an expression of confidence in God's Word to effect a change in their history; it is also the start of their own action, the attempt of black people to take their history in their own hands on the basis of the gift of freedom made possible in and through divine fellowship. “To take one's troubles to the Lord in prayer” is to recognize that the One who said to Moses “I Am Who I Am” (Exod. 3:14 <small>RSV</small>) can cause being to replace nonbeing, merely through the assertion of the Word. Therefore to give one's allegiance to another authority than the divine Word of liberation is to negate divine fellowship. We are thus commanded to give our complete selves to God in prayer for the struggle of freedom. It is on the knowledge of this vertical divine-human relationship that the true struggle of liberation in history is based.</p>
<p class="indent">Community worship is also an important expression of the divine-human fellowship. Black worship itself is a liberating event for those who share the experience of the people that bears witness to God's presence in their midst. Through prayer, testimony, song, and sermon the people transcend the limitations of their immediate history and encounter the divine power, thereby creating a moment of ecstasy and joy wherein they recognize that the pain of oppression is not the last word about black life. It is not unusual for the people to get “carried <a id="page_133"/>away” with their feelings, making it difficult for an observer to know what is actually happening. But the meaning of this event, according to the people, is found in their liberating encounter with the divine Spirit. In this encounter, they are set free as children of God. To understand what this means for black people, we need only to remember that they have not known freedom in white America. Therefore, to be told, “You are free, my children” is to create indescribable joy and excitement in the people. They sing because they are free. Black worship is a celebration of freedom. It is a black happening, the time when the people gather together in the name of the One who promised not to leave the little ones alone in trouble. The people shout, moan, and cry as a testimony to the experience of God's liberating presence in their lives. “There is joy on the inside and it wells up so strong that we can't keep still,” testifies an ex-slave. “It is fire in the bones. Any time fire touches a man, he will jump.”<sup><a href="notes.xhtml#ch07-fnr7" id="ch07-fn7">7</a></sup></p>
<p class="indent">Human liberation as fellowship with God also must be seen as the very heart of the theological concept of the “image of God,” even though this point has often been obscured. In the history of theology, the image of God has frequently been identified with the human capacity to reason. By contrast, theologians since Karl Barth, taking their cue from the Reformation, have recognized the relational character of the image of God. But even Barth did not set forth the political and social implications of the divine-human encounter with sufficient clarity. His concern for the transcendent quality of God's presence obscured the obvious political import of his analysis, even though Barth himself never viewed his theology as separate from his political involvement in the world. It is within this context that the exchange between Barth and Martin Niemöller ought to be understood. According to George Casalis,</p>
<p class="block">Barth said to Niemöller, “You haven't the least idea what theology is all about, and yet how can I complain? For you think and see and do the right things!” To which Niemöller replied, “You can't stop thinking theologically for a moment, and yet how can I complain? For you think and see and do the right things too!”<sup><a href="notes.xhtml#ch07-fnr8" id="ch07-fn8">8</a></sup></p>
<p class="indent1">On the one hand, this exchange illustrates Barth's view that theology is relevant for life. But on the other, it also points out that Barth's exposition of the connection ought to be seen in a perspective in which <a id="page_134"/>theology is the exposition of the meaning of God's liberation. For to affirm that human beings are free only when that freedom is derived from divine revelation has concrete political consequences. If we are created for God, then any other allegiance is a denial of freedom, and we must struggle against those who attempt to enslave us. The image of God is not merely a personal relationship with God, but is also that constituent of humanity which makes all people struggle against captivity. It is the ground of rebellion and revolution among slaves.</p>
<p class="indent">The relational character of human liberation as grounded in the human struggle to be free is emphasized in the black spirituals. Black people sang that Jesus</p>
<p class="para1">Came down here and talked to me,</p>
<p class="para">Went away and left me free.</p>
<p class="body-text1">They also sang:</p>
<p class="para1">You say the Lord has set you free,…</p>
<p class="para">Why don't you let yo’ neighbor be!</p>
<p class="body-text1">In both lyrics the theme is freedom in this world as an essential constituent of Jesus’ redemption. Human fellowship with God is defined as Jesus’ work of liberation (“Came down here and <i>talked</i> with me, Went away and left me free”). The freedom derived from Jesus’ Incarnation is connected with having talked with Jesus. This talking is fellowship with him and thus is the foundation of freedom. It is the basis of the struggle to live in the world according to divine obedience. (“You say the Lord has set you free, Why don't you let yo’ neighbor be!”). Liberation is not only a relationship with God but an encounter grounded in the historical struggle to be free. “The Christian faith is freedom in struggle, in contradiction, and in temptation.”<sup><a href="notes.xhtml#ch07-fnr9" id="ch07-fn9">9</a></sup></p>
<p class="head" id="sub3"><b>LIBERATION AS FREEDOM IN RELATION TO SELF AND THE COMMUNITY OF THE OPPRESSED</b></p>
<p class="indent1">To affirm that liberation is an expression of the image of God is to say not only who God is but also who I am and who my people are. Liberation is knowledge of self; it is a vocation to affirm who I am created to be. Furthermore, it is clear from divine revelation as witnessed <a id="page_135"/>in Scripture that authentic liberation of self is attainable only in the context of an oppressed community in the struggle of freedom. Because God's freedom for humanity is the divine liberation of the oppressed from bondage, human freedom as response to God's gracious liberation is an act for our sisters and brothers who are oppressed. There can be no freedom for God in isolation from the humiliated and abused. There can be no freedom for God unless the hungry are fed, the sick are healed, and justice is given for the poor. This is the meaning of Bibilov's comment in Bernard Malamud's <i>The Fixer</i>: “Keep in mind that the purpose of freedom is to create it for others.”<sup><a href="notes.xhtml#ch07-fnr10" id="ch07-fn10">10</a></sup> How can we claim to be liberated or in the process of liberation in the Christian sense, if the structure and meaning of liberation are not derived from the oppressed community in its struggle of freedom? No one can be truly liberated until <i>all</i> are liberated. And until that eschatological event happens, the measure of liberation achievable is limited to the consciousness of freedom as defined by the oppressed and downtrodden in their fight for justice. In an unjust society, freedom for Christ can be found only among those who are in chains.</p>
<p class="indent">In the dialectic of freedom and oppression as both are related to political praxis the black theological view of liberation emerges. On the one hand, oppression is the denial of freedom, and therefore the opposite of liberation. But on the other, in an unredeemed social existence no one can be free who is not oppressed, that is, identified with the struggle of the unfree. There is no way to avoid the paradox I have expressed elsewhere: “Freedom is the opposite of oppression, but only the oppressed are truly free.”<sup><a href="notes.xhtml#ch07-fnr11" id="ch07-fn11">11</a></sup> We must affirm this paradox because Jesus (in the dialectic of his death and resurrection) has connected his liberation with the struggles of the wretched of the earth. The Christian community, therefore, is that community that freely becomes oppressed, because they know that Jesus himself has defined humanity's liberation in the context of what happens to the little ones. Christians join the cause of the oppressed in the fight for justice not because of some philosophical principle of “the Good” or because of a religious feeling of sympathy for people in prison. Sympathy does not change the structures of injustice. The authentic identity of Christians with the poor is found in the claim which the Jesusencounter lays upon their own life-style, a claim that connects the word “Christian” with the liberation of the poor. Christians fight not <a id="page_136"/>for humanity in general but for themselves and out of their love for concrete human beings.</p>
<p class="indent">This raises the question, Who are the oppressed? What does Black Theology mean by oppression? Is Black Theology saying that only black people are oppressed and, further, that oppression is limited to social, political, and economic reality? What about the obvious oppression of others not of African descent and also the oppression of oppressors themselves which may be described as mental or spiritual oppression? After all, are we not <i>all</i> oppressed, especially those who think that their freedom is found in social, political, and economic domination of others?</p>
<p class="indent">Although these questions point to an essential truth of the gospel of liberation, they have been used by oppressors for untruth. The untruth of these questions lies in the subjective and often undisclosed intention of the people who ask them. While pretending to be concerned about the universal character of the human condition, oppressors are in fact concerned to justify their own particular status in society. They want to be oppressors and Christians at the same time. Since the oppressed are the only true Christians, oppressors claim to be victims, not for the purpose of being liberated but for their own social interests in retaining a “Christian” identity while being against Jesus Christ. This is what Dietrich Bonhoeffer in another context called “cheap grace.”<sup><a href="notes.xhtml#ch07-fnr12" id="ch07-fn12">12</a></sup> I call it hypocrisy and blasphemy.</p>
<p class="indent">While it is true that <i>all</i> are oppressed (and especially those who rule over others), <i>only</i> those whose existence (and thus consciousness) is defined by the liberation of people from social, political, and economic bondage can understand the dialectic of oppression and freedom in the practice of liberation. Therefore when white theological rulers claim, “We are all oppressed!” they are speaking the truth, although they do not understand the truth. To do so, the truth would have to be reflected in their struggle to free themselves from their culture in order to join the cultural freedom of the poor. Until their consciousness is born anew in the light of black liberation, the truth of the statement is limited to verbal propositions that may be interesting for academicians but of little consequences for the freedom of the poor.</p>
<p class="indent">The first task of theology is to recognize that truth is not contained in words. Truth is found in the dynamic of the divine-human encounter in social existence wherein people recognize the connections <a id="page_137"/>between historical struggle and ultimate reality. I do not believe that people can understand the truth of the statement that “all are oppressed” unless their consciousness is defined by that social existence that makes for understanding. In the context of biblical revelation, this means quite clearly the social existence of the poor. When therefore the question is asked, “Are not all oppressed?” one can easily discover the function of the question by unmasking the social interests that the questioner intends to represent. If the person is white and wants to find a justification for the continued existence of white suburban churches that obviously contradict the essence of Jesus’ gospel of liberation, then the asking of the question and its implied affirmative answer is nothing but a clever theological trick to blur important <i>material</i> distinctions in social existence itself. For it is material reality (social, economic, and political existence with the poor) that makes for the proper understanding of spiritual reality (“all oppressed”). But when the spiritual reality really is made the point of departure of liberation, important material distinctions are lost in clouds of theological rhetoric that not only enhance confusion but contribute to the continued existence of oppression.</p>
<p class="indent">By putting physical oppression derived from unjust social structures in the same category with suburban loneliness, the white questioner implies that either one may be the point of departure for an understanding of the gospel of liberation. But that is not true. Of course everyone has problems, but those problems can be understood only from <i>one</i> social perspective, namely, the social perspective of the poor in the struggle of freedom. Those whose consciousness is defined by the oppressors cannot understand what liberation is. For the oppressors to understand liberation, they must be liberated from being political oppressors. When the dialectic of change in social existence meets the idea of liberation, liberation's content and form are thus radically changed. What was once merely spoken is now actualized in history, enabling the former oppressors to know that truth is embodied in the historical movement of the liberation and not in theology textbooks.</p>
<p class="indent">Because the phrase “all are oppressed” can be understood only from the perspective of the poor, only they are in a position to take seriously the <i>universal</i> dimension of the gospel of liberation. This places an awesome responsibility upon them, for when the dialectic of oppression and liberation is seen correctly, the oppressed recognize <a id="page_138"/>that their call is to be God's “Kingdom of priests” to all peoples of the earth. Election involves service, even to the oppressors. This is the significance of Jesus’ refusal to define God's Kingdom in terms of the private advantage of anyone, not even himself. When James and John said to him, “Grant us to sit, one at your right hand and one at your left, in your glory,” Jesus replied: “You do not know what you are asking. Are you able to drink the cup that I drink, or to be baptized with the baptism with which I am baptized?” (Mark 10:35–38 <small>RSV</small>). And to prove that they did not know what they were asking or recognize the connection between election and service, they said, “We are able” (10:39). Although Jesus’ reply made clear that a place in God's Kingdom is not a popularity contest given out to special favorites but for those (i.e., the poor) for whom it has already been assigned, the other disciples still became indignant at James and John. At that point Jesus said:</p>
<p class="block">You know that among the Gentiles those whom they recognize as their rulers lord it over them, and their great ones are tyrants over them. But it is not so among you; but whoever wishes to become great among you must be your servant, and whoever wishes to be first among you must be slave of all. For the Son of Man came not to be served but to serve, and to give his life a ransom for many. (Mark 10:42–45 <small>NRSV</small>)</p>
<p class="body-text">To be a “slave of all” is to recognize that the struggle of liberation is for all. This recognition does not make one submissive to unjust powers, but humble before Jesus Christ who is the Lord of all. His presence in our midst requires that we subordinate our personal interests to the coming liberation for all. Those who see God's coming liberation breaking into the present must live as if the future is already present in their midst. They must bear witness to humanity's liberation by freeing the present from the past and for the future. This means fighting for the inauguration of liberation in our social existence, creating new levels of human relationship in society. The struggle for liberation is the service the people of God render for all, even those who are responsible for the structure of slavery.</p>
<p class="indent">The assertion that liberation is for all does not mean that all will regard God's coming realm of freedom as good news. Even some oppressed people, having “made” it in the oppressors’ world, will not <a id="page_139"/>always welcome the freedom that the liberation struggle inaugurates. Their mental enslavement to their few crumbs from the master's table often negates their desire to share in the freedom of humanity. Therefore, though oppressed, they do not share the consciousness that arises from the dialectic of oppression and liberation in the political praxis of the people. They thus must be liberated in spite of and against themselves.</p>
<p class="indent">It is the same for the oppressors: they never recognize that the struggle of freedom is for all, including themselves. As Ostrovsky, the lawyer in Bernard Malamud's <i>The Fixer</i>, says: “In a sick country every step to health is an insult to those who live on its sickness.”<sup><a href="notes.xhtml#ch07-fnr13" id="ch07-fn13">13</a></sup> As bearers of liberation—of the realm of health in a sick society—the oppressed must therefore fight against the oppressors in order to fight for them. This is what Jesus meant when he said, “the Son of man…came not to be served but to serve, and to give his life as a ransom for many” (Mark 10:45 <small>RSV</small>). The service would not be understood and would lead to his death.</p>
<p class="indent">To recognize that liberation is for oppressors because it is for all people prevents hate and revenge from destroying the revolutionary struggle. This is one of the essential truths of Franz Fanon's insights on freedom. He saw that the struggle was for all. “For Europe, for ourselves and for humanity, comrades, we must turn over a new leaf, we must work out new concepts, and try to set afoot a new humanity.”<sup><a href="notes.xhtml#ch07-fnr14" id="ch07-fn14">14</a></sup> Like Jesus in his attitude toward the oppressors of the first century, Fanon did not expect Europeans to recognize that Africa's liberation would be for Europe. Only those who are oppressed can see that the true liberation of self is found in the oppressed community in struggle of freedom.</p>
<p class="head" id="sub4"><b>LIBERATION AS THE PROJECT OF FREEDOM IN HISTORY</b></p>
<p class="indent1">There is no true liberation independent of the struggle for freedom in history. History is the immanent character of liberation; it is the project of freedom. The immanence of liberation is “visible whenever the emancipation of [people] from the chains of slavery takes place in history.”<sup><a href="notes.xhtml#ch07-fnr15" id="ch07-fn15">15</a></sup> There is no liberation without transformation, that is, without the struggle for freedom in this world. There is no liberation without the commitment of revolutionary action against injustice, slavery, and oppression. Liberation then is not merely a <a id="page_140"/>thought in my head; it is the sociohistorical movement of a people from oppression to freedom—Israelites from Egypt, black people from American slavery. It is the mind and body in motion, responding to the passion and the rhythm of divine revelation, and affirming that no chain shall hold my humanity down. This is what black slaves meant when they sang:</p>
<p class="para1">I'm a chile of God wid my soul set free,</p>
<p class="para">For Christ hab bought my liberty.</p>
<p class="body-text1">A similar point is made in Scripture when divine revelation is connected with history, and salvation is defined in political terms. In the Old Testament salvation is grounded in history and is identical with God's righteousness in delivering the oppressed from political bondage. Salvation is a historical event of rescue. It is God delivering the people from their enemies and bestowing upon Israel new possibilities within the historical context of its existence. “This means that humanity's spiritual aims are inseparably connected with the transformation of society.”<sup><a href="notes.xhtml#ch07-fnr16" id="ch07-fn16">16</a></sup></p>
<p class="indent">The historical character of liberation as an essential ingredient in salvation is also found in the New Testament. Jesus’ message centered on the proclamation of liberation for the poor, and his exorcisms clearly illustrated that he viewed his ministry as an engagement in battle with the powers of evil that hold people in captivity. The healing of the sick, feeding the hungry, and giving sight to the blind mean that Jesus did not regard salvation as an abstract, spiritual idea or a feeling in the heart. Salvation is the granting of physical wholeness in the concreteness of pain and suffering.</p>
<p class="indent">Liberation then cannot be separated from the historical struggle of freedom in this world. To be liberated is not simply “a status one has but an action one undertakes as a self-conscious subject.”<sup><a href="notes.xhtml#ch07-fnr17" id="ch07-fn17">17</a></sup> Liberation means:</p>
<p class="para" style="padding-top:17px;">Mammy, don't you cook no more,</p>
<p class="para">You are free, you are free!</p>
<p class="para" style="padding-top:10px;">Rooster, don't you crow no more,</p>
<p class="para">You are free, you are free!</p>
<p class="para" style="padding-top:10px;">Old hen, don't you lay no more eggs,</p>
<p class="para">You are free, you are free.</p>
<a id="page_141"/>
<p class="indent1">Any view of liberation that fails to take seriously a people's freedom in history is not biblical and is thus unrelated to the One who has called us into being. That is why black preachers from Richard Allen to Adam Clayton Powell and Martin Luther King, Jr., viewed slavery and oppression as a contradiction of the divine will. While white missionaries and preachers were saying, “The Freedom which Christianity gives is a Freedom from the Bondage of Sin and Satan, and from the Dominion of Men's Lust and Passions and inordinate Desires” but “does not make the least Alteration in Civil property,”<sup><a href="notes.xhtml#ch07-fnr18" id="ch07-fn18">18</a></sup> black preachers were taking their text from the book of Exodus and its account of Moses leading the Israelites from bondage. They also preached about Joshua and the battle of Jericho and John on the island of Patmos. Each of these biblical stories stressed God's will to make historical freedom a reality in the land of the oppressed.</p>
<p class="indent">Liberation as the fight for justice in this world has always been an important ingredient in black religion. Indeed black religion's existence as another reality, completely different from white religion, is partly related to its grounding of black faith in the historical struggle of freedom. Richard Allen, Absalom Jones, and other blacks walked out of St. George Methodist Church in 1787, and by 1816 Allen had become the first bishop in the newly organized African Methodist Episcopal Church. This church, like its sister church (African Methodist Episcopal Zion Church), became an important instrument of the attainment of black freedom during and after slavery. Independent black Baptist churches had a similar function in black life. During slavery black preachers were almost unanimous in pronouncing God's judgment on human servitude and in affirming that God created black people for freedom. According to the preachers, slaves must struggle to realize freedom in history by breaking the chains of slavery. While not all black preachers went as far as Henry Highland Garnet, he nonetheless represented the spirit of the black religious tradition when he identified obedience to God with the struggle against slavery. In an address to slaves, he said:</p>
<p class="block">Your condition does not absolve you from your moral obligation. The diabolical injustice by which your liberties are cloven down, neither God, nor angels, or just men, command you to suffer for a single moment. Therefore, it is your solemn and imperative duty to use every means, both moral, intellectual, and physical, that promises success.<sup><a href="notes.xhtml#ch07-fnr19" id="ch07-fn19">19</a></sup></p>
<a id="page_142"/>
<p class="indent1">The identification of divine justice with civil justice became the central theme of the civil rights movement in the 1950s and 60s. This identification was consistent with black religious tradition and with the Bible. To justify his fight against injustice, Martin Luther King, Jr., referred not only to the Exodus and Jesus Christ but especially to the prophets of the Old Testament. He quoted Amos often: “Let justice roll down like waters, and righteousness like an ever-flowing stream” (5:24 <small>RSV</small>).</p>
<p class="indent">The historical character of liberation is also found in the spirituals and the blues. The spirituals stressed freedom from legal slavery, while the blues expressed the quest for freedom from the structures of oppression that emerged after the Civil War. Both the spirituals and the blues are inseparably connected with the social existence of a people trying to find self-expression in a world that placed severe limitations on black people. Liberation thus meant the breaking of the chains that held the people in servitude. This theme is expressed with poetic imagination by the contemporary black poet Mari Evans:</p>
<p class="para1">I take my freedom</p>
<p class="para">lest I die</p>
<p class="para">for pride runs through my veins….</p>
<p class="para">For I am he who</p>
<p class="para">dares to say</p>
<p class="para">I shall be Free, or dead</p>
<p class="para">today….<sup><a href="notes.xhtml#ch07-fnr20" id="ch07-fn20">20</a></sup></p>
<p class="indent1">Liberation is not a theoretical proposition to be debated in a philosophy or theology seminar. It is a historical reality, born in the struggle for freedom in which an oppressed people recognize that they were not created to be seized, bartered, deeded, and auctioned. To understand the question of liberation, we need only hear the words, experience the mood, and encounter the passion of those who have to deal with the dialectic of freedom and oppression in the concreteness of their everyday existence.</p>
<p class="para" style="padding-top:20px;">Standin’ on de corner, weren't doin’ no hahm,</p>
<p class="para">Up come a ’liceman an’ he grab me by de ahm.</p>
<p class="para">Blow a little whistle an’ he ring a little bell</p>
<p class="para">Heah come patrol wagon runnin’ like hell.</p>
<a id="page_143"/>
<p class="para" style="padding-top:10px;">Judge he call me up an’ ast mah name.</p>
<p class="para">Ah tole him fo’ sho’ Ah weren't to blame.</p>
<p class="para">He wink at ’liceman, ’liceman wink too;</p>
<p class="para">Judge say, “Nigger, you got some work to do!”</p>
<p class="para" style="padding-top:10px;">Workin’ on ol’ road bank, shackle boun’.</p>
<p class="para">Long, long time ’fo’ six months roll aroun’.</p>
<p class="para">Miserin’ fo’ my honey, she miserin’ fo’ me,</p>
<p class="para">But, Lawd, white folks won't let go holdin’ me.</p>
<p class="indent1">In this context, liberation is the opposite of the policeman, the judge, and that system which may be loosely described as “white folks” and in the New Testament is called the principalities and powers. Black people do not need a degree in theology or philosophy to know that something is not right about this world. Karl Marx is helpful in providing a theoretical frame for an articulation of the consciousness of the masses who are victims of economic oppression. But blacks in the United States and some other places believe that the problem of oppression is much more complex than Marx knew. Any analysis that fails to deal with racism, that demon embedded in white folks’ being, is inadequate.</p>
<p class="para" style="padding-top:17px;">Diggin’ in de road bank, diggin’ in de ditch,</p>
<p class="para">Chain gang's got me, boss got de switch.</p>
<p class="para">All ah want's dese cold iron shackles off mah leg.</p>
<p class="para" style="padding-top:10px;">Judge say, “Three days!” Ah turn aside.</p>
<p class="paraa">“And ninety nine more years!” Ah hung mah head an’ cried.</p>
<p class="para">All ah want's dese cold iron shackles off mah leg.</p>
<p class="indent1">Of course, liberation is more than the recognition that iron shackles are inhuman; it is also the willingness to do what is necessary to break the chains. As Paulo Freire says: “Nor does the discovery by the oppressed that they exist in dialectical relationship with the oppressor…in itself constitute liberation. The oppressed can overcome the contradiction in which they are caught only when this perception enlists them in the struggle to free themselves.”<sup><a href="notes.xhtml#ch07-fnr21" id="ch07-fn21">21</a></sup></p>
<p class="indent">Also it is in the historical context of reflection and action that the oppressed recognize that God is struggling with them in the fight for <a id="page_144"/>liberation. This is the meaning of Jesus’ lowly birth in Bethlehem, his healing of the sick and demon-possessed, and his death on the cross. God is making plain that God's kingdom is not simply a heavenly reality; it is an earthly reality as well. Human beings were not created to work in somebody else's fields, to pick somebody else's cotton, and to live in ghettos among rats and filth. They were created for liberation—for fellowship with God and the projection of self into the future, grounded in historical possibilities. Liberation is self-determination in history and laying claim to that which rightfully belongs to humanity. As Mari Evans puts it:</p>
<p class="para" style="padding-top:14px;">I</p>
<p class="para">am a black woman</p>
<p class="para">tall as a cypress</p>
<p class="para">strong</p>
<p class="para">beyond all definition still</p>
<p class="para">defying place</p>
<p class="para">and time</p>
<p class="para">and circumstance</p>
<p class="para">assailed</p>
<p class="para2">impervious</p>
<p class="para3">  indestructible</p>
<p class="para">Look</p>
<p class="para2">on me and be</p>
<p class="para">renewed.<sup><a href="notes.xhtml#ch07-fnr22" id="ch07-fn22">22</a></sup></p>
<p class="body-text0">And lest this struggle seem only grim and austere, the same poet sings of its present joy.</p>
<p class="para" style="padding-top:10px;">Who</p>
<p class="para">can be born black</p>
<p class="para">and not</p>
<p class="para">sing</p>
<p class="para">the wonder of it</p>
<p class="para">the joy</p>
<p class="para">the challenge</p>
<p class="para">Who</p>
<p class="para">can be born</p>
<p class="para">black</p>
<p class="para">and not exult!<sup><a href="notes.xhtml#ch07-fnr23" id="ch07-fn23">23</a></sup></p>
<a id="page_145"/>
<p class="head" id="sub5"><b>LIBERATION AS THE PROJECT OF FREEDOM IN HOPE</b></p>
<p class="indent1">While the meaning of liberation includes the historical determination of freedom in this world, it is not limited to what is possible in history. There is a transcendent element in the definition of liberation which affirms that the “realm of freedom is always more than the fragments of a free life which we may accomplish in history.”<sup><a href="notes.xhtml#ch07-fnr24" id="ch07-fn24">24</a></sup> As the writer of I John puts it, “Beloved, we are God's children now; it does not appear what we shall be, but we know that when he appears we shall be like him, for we shall see him as he is” (3:2). There is included in liberation the “not yet,” a vision of a new heaven and a new earth. This simply means that the oppressed have a future not made with human hands but grounded in the liberating promises of God. They have a liberation not bound by their own strivings. In Jesus’ death and resurrection, God has freed us to fight against social and political structures while not being determined by them. Black preachers expressed that truth with apocalyptic imagination:</p>
<p class="block">I know the way gets awful dark sometimes; it looks like everything is against us. Sometimes we wake up in the dark hours of midnight, briny tears flowing down our cheeks, crying and not knowing what we are crying about. But because God is our Captain and is on board now, we can sit still and hear the Word of the Lord. Away back before the wind ever blowed or before the earth was made, Our God had us in mind. He looked down through time one morning and saw you and me and ordained from the very beginning that we should be his children. You remember Old John the Revelator who claimed he saw a number that had come through hard trials and great tribulations and who had washed their robes in the blood of the lamb. Oh, brothers! Ain't you glad that you have already been in the dressing room, because it won't be long before we will take the wings of the morning and go where there will be no more sin and sorrow, no more weeping and mourning.<sup><a href="notes.xhtml#ch07-fnr25" id="ch07-fn25">25</a></sup></p>
<p class="body-text1">This sermon makes clear that liberation is also beyond history and not limited to the realities and limitations of this world. God is the sovereign ruler and nothing can thwart God's will to liberate the oppressed.</p>
<a id="page_146"/>
<p class="indent">To persons who would be quick to define this kind of perspective on liberation as an opiate, I would suggest that the analysis of black eschatology as merely compensatory is too superficial and thus reflects the use of intellectual categories not derived from the social existence of black people. Harriet Tubman, Sojourner Truth, and Nat Turner are enough evidence that such language about God and heaven does not always lead to passivity. But when black scholars spend too much time and energy trying to show how “radical” and “revolutionary” black religion was or is, they often fall into the trap of defining the content of these words in the light of Marxism or some other theoretical frame that did not arise from the social existence of black people. While recognizing the possibility of overlap in human experience, I contend that black people's experience of liberation as hope for a new heaven and a new earth represents a new mode of perception, different from the experience of white people. When black people sing, “When the roll is called up yonder, I'll be there,” they are referring to more than a metaphysical reality about heaven. For the “roll up yonder” is not about an object but about black subjects who have encountered liberation's future. The people are talking about an experience of freedom that has already broken into their present, and the signs of its presence are reflected in the rhythm and the dance of the people. Rhythm and dance point to the experience of liberation as ecstasy, that is, the ability of the people to step outside of their assigned place and to affirm their right to be other than what is now possible in history. To be able to dance to the rhythm of black life means that the people are moving with a sense of direction and artistry derived from the depths of the “not yet.” To be sure, sometimes the people <i>have</i> to sing to keep from crying, but the fact that they can sing is an indication of their transcendence over the present and a step into the future.</p>
<p class="indent">Liberation as a future event is not simply <i>other</i> worldly but is the divine future that breaks into their social existence, bestowing wholeness in the present situation of pain and suffering and enabling black people to know that the existing state of oppression contradicts their real humanity as defined by God's future. Black people sometimes expressed the contradiction between their present slavery and the liberated future in folkloric tales. Consider the tale entitled “Swapping Dreams.” The master told Ike: “I dreamed I went to Nigger Heaven last night, and I saw there a lot of garbage, some torn-down houses, a <a id="page_147"/>few old broken down, rotten fences, the muddiest, sloppiest streets I ever saw, and a big bunch of ragged, dirty Negroes walking around.” But rather than accept the master's perspective about himself and his community, Ike responded with a comment that was deceptive and full of humor but liberating in its rejection of the present white value system. “Umph, umph, Massa,” said Ike, “yah sho’ musta et de same t'ing Ah did las’ night, ’cause Ah dreamed Ah went up ter de white man's paradise, an’ de streets wuz all ob gol’ an’ silvah, and dey was lots o’ milk an’ honey dere, an’ putty pearly gates, but dey wuzn't uh soul in de whole place.”<sup><a href="notes.xhtml#ch07-fnr26" id="ch07-fn26">26</a></sup> With this story, the statement about heaven becomes a revolutionary judgment against the system of oppression. The future becomes a present reality in the slave's consciousness, enabling him or her to struggle against the white system of injustice. Through story, black people created liberated structures of the future wherein they were able to encounter freedom's essence even though they were slaves.</p>
<p class="indent">It is important to note that Black Theology, while taking history with utmost seriousness, does not limit liberation to history. When people are bound to history, they are enslaved to what the New Testament calls law and death. If death is the ultimate power and life has no future beyond this world, then the rulers of the state who control the police and the military are indeed our masters. They have our future in their hands and the oppressed can be made to obey laws of injustice. But if the oppressed, while living in history, can nonetheless see beyond it, if they can visualize an eschatological future beyond the history of their humiliation, then “the <i>sigh</i> of the oppressed,” to use Marx's phrase, can become a cry of revolution against the established order. It is this revolutionary cry that is granted in the resurrection of Jesus. Liberation then is not simply what oppressed people can accomplish alone; it is basically what God has done and will do to accomplish liberation both in and beyond history. Indeed, because we know that death has been conquered, we are set free to fight for liberation in history—knowing that we have a “home over yonder.”</p>
<p class="indent">“The home over yonder,” vividly and artistically described in the black slave songs, is a gift of divine freedom. If this “over-worldliness” in freedom is not taken with utmost seriousness, then there is no way for the oppressed to be sustained in the struggle against injustice. The oppressed will get tired and also become afraid of the risks of freedom. They will say as the Israelites said to Moses when they found <a id="page_148"/>themselves between Pharaoh's army and the sea: “Is it because there are no graves in Egypt that you have taken us away to die in the wilderness? What have you done to us, in bringing us out of Egypt?” (Exod. 14:11 <small>RSV</small>). The fear of freedom and the risks contained in the struggle are ever present realities in the fight for liberation. But the transcendence of freedom, granted in Jesus’ resurrection, introduces a factor that makes a significant difference. The difference is not that we are taken out of history while living on earth—that would be an opiate. Rather, it is a difference that plants our being firmly in history for struggle, because we know that death is not the goal of history. It was this truth that enabled black slaves to survive humanely in a situation of extreme cruelty. To be sure, they sang about the fear of “sinking down” and the dread of being a “motherless child.” They encountered death and expressed the agony of its presence in song:</p>
<p class="para1">Soon one mornin’, death comes a-creepin’ in my room.</p>
<p class="para">O my Lawd, O my Lawd, what shall I do?</p>
<p class="body-text1">Death was not an abstract idea, to be debated in a philosophy seminar. Death was a personal experience of loss who appeared in the black situation of pain as “a little ole man,” “tippin’ in the room.” Sometimes death was pictured as “a chariot swingin’ low” and “a train a-blowin’ at de station.” That is why blacks sing</p>
<p class="para" style="padding-top:15px;">Before this time another year,</p>
<p class="para">I may be gone;</p>
<p class="para">Out in some lonely graveyard,</p>
<p class="para">O Lord, how long.</p>
<p class="body-text0" style="padding-top:2px;">But because black slaves believed that death had been conquered in Jesus’ resurrection, they transcended death and interpreted freedom from death as a heavenly, eschatological reality.</p>
<p class="para1">You needn't mind my dying,</p>
<p class="para">Jesus’ goin’ to make up my dying bed.</p>
<p class="para" style="padding-top:10px;">In my room I know,</p>
<p class="para">Somebody is going to cry,</p>
<p class="para">All I ask you to do for me,</p>
<p class="para">Just close my dying eyes.</p>
<a id="page_149"/>
<p class="indent1">They could transcend death because they knew about Jesus’ past, had encountered his presence, and thus were assured of his future coming. Jesus’ future coming was the foundation of their faith, enabling them to express this truth in song: “Where shall I be when the first trumpet soun’; soun’ so loud till it woke up de dead?” “One day, one day ’bout twelve o’ clock, O this ol’ earth goin’ to reel an’ rock.” “O My Lord, what a morning, when the stars begin to fall!” “When the sun refuse to shine, when the moon goes down in blood!” “In dat great getting up morning,” “de world will be on fire,” and “you'll see de stars a-fallen’, de forked lighting, de coffins bursting,” and “de righteous marching.” “The dumb will talk, the lame will walk, the blind will see, and the deaf will hear.”</p>
</div>
</body>
</html>