<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>chapter05</title>
<link href="ebook_style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
<meta content="urn:uuid:5bf1d25e-4978-4604-b0f7-22d24fac0880" name="Adept.expected.resource"/>
</head>
<body>
<div>
<a id="page_77"/>
<h2 class="chap_tit"><span class="underline">CHAPTER 5</span></h2>
<p class="chapz"><b>Black Theology and Ideology</b></p>
<p class="indent">Because Christian theology is conditioned and limited by social context through our existence in a particular political setting (<a href="chapter03.xhtml">Chap. 3</a>), and because God is revealed in history (<a href="chapter04.xhtml">Chap. 4</a>), we are obligated to ask: How do we distinguish our words about God from God's Word, our wishes from God's will, our dreams and aspirations from the work of the Spirit? This is a crucial problem for Christian theology. Unless this question is answered satisfactorily, black theologians’ distinction between white theology and Black Theology is vulnerable to the white contention that the latter is merely the ideological justification of radical black politics. While some black theologians may be content with the identification of Black Theology with current black politics, I maintain that the authenticity of black theological discourse is dependent upon its pointing to the divine One whose presence is not restricted to any historical manifestation. Indeed, unless Black Theology seeks to bear witness to the divine Word who transcends the subjective musings of black theologians, then there is no difference between Black Theology and white theology when viewed from the perspective of Feuerbach's critique that religion is nothing but human talk, nothing but human projections and illusions. Black theologians must face the question of ideology head-on: To what extent is the God in Black Theology limited to the biological origin of its advocates? Unless we black theologians can make an adequate distinction between divine revelation and human aspirations, there is nothing to keep Black Theology from identifying God's will with anything black people should decide to do at any given historical moment. Moreover, valid theology is distinguishable from heresy <i>only</i> if the former is bound to the divine One who is the ground of its existence.</p>
<a id="page_78"/>
<p class="head" id="sub1"><b>H. RICHARD NIEBUHR'S <i>CHRIST AND CULTURE</i></b></p>
<p class="indent1">Although the distinction between God's Word and our words is important and necessary, their exact relationship is not easy to ascertain. The complexity of this theological problem is brilliantly analyzed in H. Richard Niebuhr's <i>Christ and Culture</i>. On the one hand, Niebuhr affirms the universal claims of divine revelation in Jesus Christ which transcends the limitations of history. But on the other hand, he also recognizes that human speech about divine revelation is conditioned by cultural and historical relativity. Both principles convinced Niebuhr that Christians cannot avoid the Christ-culture problem; however, the ultimate solution to the problem does not rest with human answers, but with the One who transcends the limitations of humanity. Hence Niebuhr says: “Christ's answer to the problem of human culture is one thing, Christian answers are another; yet his followers are assured that he uses their various works in accomplishing his own.”<sup><a href="notes.xhtml#ch05-fnr1" id="ch05-fn1">1</a></sup></p>
<p class="indent">Taking seriously both the universality of divine revelation and the particularity of theological talk about that revelation, Niebuhr proceeds to describe five typical attitudes Christians have assumed toward culture. First, there are the radical Christians who set Christ in opposition to culture. Radical Christianity “uncompromisingly affirms the sole authority of Christ over the Christian and resolutely rejects culture's claims to loyalty.”<sup><a href="notes.xhtml#ch05-fnr2" id="ch05-fn2">2</a></sup> Since everything in culture is anti-Christian, followers of Christ must withdraw from culture. Examples of this view are found in I John's contrasting the Spirit of God with the spirits of the world (4:1f.), Tertullian's contention that Athens has nothing to do with Jerusalem, and more recently in Tolstoy's definition of Christ's new law as the opposite of the empirical churches and states and other cultural institutions.</p>
<p class="indent">At the opposite end of the attitudinal spectrum of radical Christianity is the view that Christ is a “part of culture in the sense that he himself is part of the social heritage that must be transmitted and conserved.”<sup><a href="notes.xhtml#ch05-fnr3" id="ch05-fn3">3</a></sup> He is “the Messiah of [the] society, the fulfiller of its hopes and aspirations, the perfector of its true faith, the source of its holiest spirit.” This view experiences “no great tension between the church and the world, the social laws and the gospels, the working of divine grace and human effort, the ethics of salvation and the ethics <a id="page_79"/>of social conservation or progress.”<sup><a href="notes.xhtml#ch05-fnr4" id="ch05-fn4">4</a></sup> Jesus Christ is primarily a moral teacher and leader of the dominant values in culture. Representatives of this view are found in the early Christian Gnostics, the medieval theologian Abelard, the “cultural protestantism” of Albrecht Ritschl, and among American Christians who see no distinction between the gospel of Jesus Christ and the American way of life.</p>
<p class="indent">Because of Niebuhr's simultaneous emphases on faith in the universal God and the human inability to escape the matrix of culture, he rejected both of these views (the sectarian and the culturalist) of the relationship of Christ and society. While the former rightly recognized that divine revelation is not identical with culture, it failed to acknowledge that Christ calls us to obedience to God <i>in</i> culture. Conversely, cultural Christianity correctly affirmed that the works of human culture cannot be separated from God's grace, but it failed to recognize that grace is not restricted to and defined by the concrete events that make up human culture. Between the extremes of sectarian and culturalist positions are three median views, belonging respectively to the synthesists, the dualists, and the conversionists. While these Christians of the center share the sectarian view that God's work in Christ and man's work in culture are radically different, yet, like the cultural Christians, they seek to hold them together in unity. These three median answers are “distinguished from each other by the manner in which they attempt to combine the two authorities.”<sup><a href="notes.xhtml#ch05-fnr5" id="ch05-fn5">5</a></sup></p>
<p class="indent">For the synthesists, of whom Aquinas is the best representative, the relation between Christ and culture is hierarchical. That is, Christ is far <i>above</i> culture, as contrasted to the culturalist model of Christ in culture. At the same time the synthesist sees Christ and culture built into a single harmonious system, contrasting with the sectarian image of Christ against culture. Although Niebuhr was attracted to this position, he concluded that it does not take seriously enough the historical relativity of thought. “The effort to bring Christ and culture, God's work and man's, the temporal and the eternal, law and grace, into one system of thought and practice tends, perhaps inevitably, to the absolutizing of what is relative, the reduction of the infinite to the finite form, and the materialization of the dynamic.”<sup><a href="notes.xhtml#ch05-fnr6" id="ch05-fn6">6</a></sup></p>
<p class="indent">Niebuhr's fourth type is dualistic Christianity, the second alternative of the median views. The dualists affirm the paradoxical relationship of Christ and culture. For them the Christ-culture problem is not an issue between Christians and pagans but between <a id="page_80"/>God and us, the righteousness of God and the righteousness of self. On the one hand, dualists affirm God's act of redemption through Jesus’ death and resurrection. On the other hand, they contend that believers in Christ remain subject to sin despite God's gracious act. “Grace is in God, and sin is in man.”<sup><a href="notes.xhtml#ch05-fnr7" id="ch05-fn7">7</a></sup> This is the paradox: Christians are redeemed persons but also sinners. Like radical Christians, the dualists view culture as godless and sick unto death; but unlike the radicals, they also believe that God calls Christians to obedience in culture, sustaining them in the context of its corruption. The greatest representative of this view was Martin Luther. But others included the apostle Paul, S⊘ren Kierkegaard, and Ernst Troeltsch. Niebuhr shared many of the dualists’ convictions. He was impressed by their existential understanding of the divine-human relationship and by their dynamic interpretation of the power of the atoning work of Christ and the depth and viciousness of human sin. But he rejected their tendency toward antinomianism and cultural conservatism.</p>
<p class="indent">Conversionist Christianity, the fifth type and the third alternative among the median views, is the attitude that best represents Niebuhr's theological position. The conversionist defines Christ as the transformer of culture and is accordingly positive and hopeful toward culture. It is mainly this feature that distinguishes conversionism from dualism, and Niebuhr believed that this difference was connected to certain theological views about creation, the fall of humanity, and history. “The dualist tends so to concentrate on redemption through Christ's cross and resurrection that creation becomes for him a kind of prologue to the one mighty deed of atonement.”<sup><a href="notes.xhtml#ch05-fnr8" id="ch05-fn8">8</a></sup> But for the conversionist, God's act in creation is a major theme, “neither overpowered by nor overpowering the idea of atonement.” Consequently, “man the creature, working in a created world, lives, as the conversionist sees it, under the rule of Christ and by the creative power and ordering of the divine Word, even though in his unredeemed mind he may believe that he lives among vain things under divine wrath.”<sup><a href="notes.xhtml#ch05-fnr9" id="ch05-fn9">9</a></sup> Because of this conviction about the divine creative act, the conversionist refuses to equate creation with the fall, as implied in much of the dualist language. Because “he distinguishes the fall very sharply from creation, interpreting the former as humanity's good nature becoming corrupted,” history becomes the arena of the “dramatic interaction between God and man.”<sup><a href="notes.xhtml#ch05-fnr10" id="ch05-fn10">10</a></sup> In contrast, history for the dualist is “the time of struggle between faith <a id="page_81"/>and unbelief, a period between the giving of the promise of life and its fulfillment.” But “for the conversionist, history is the story of God's mighty deeds and of man's responses to them. He lives somewhat less ‘between the times’ and somewhat more in the divine ‘Now’ than do his brother Christians.”<sup><a href="notes.xhtml#ch05-fnr11" id="ch05-fn11">11</a></sup> The conversionist lives in an openness for the divine future breaking into the human present, transforming human culture in and to the glory of God.</p>
<p class="indent">Niebuhr's analysis of the five typical responses of Christians to the Christ-culture problem should not be understood rigidly but should be viewed with flexibility and openness. His discussion is especially helpful for our examination of the issue of ideology. Given the presuppositions and the context of his theological concern, Niebuhr was right in his preference for the conversionist attitude. With this attitude, Niebuhr emphasized three important ingredients of his theological perspective: (<i>a</i>) the universality of God in contrast with the particularity and finitude of human existence, (<i>b</i>) the emphasis on the relativity of human faith in the context of culture and historicity, and (<i>c</i>), following from the first two points, faith's involvement in, and transformation of, culture while remaining deeply aware of its own limitations. This attitude prevents faith from identifying itself with the object of its concern even while it recognizes the importance of its involvement in culture.</p>
<p class="indent">While we must not detract from Niebuhr's contribution to the Christ-culture problem, his analysis nonetheless is not without difficulties. If we are to remain faithful to the theological flexibility and openness which he demanded, and more importantly, to the biblical view of divine revelation and its relations to the struggle of freedom in the black community, then we must point out these difficulties, which are connected with his definitions of Christ and culture and their dialectical relationship.</p>
<p class="indent"><i>The Definition of Christ:</i> Niebuhr is right in his emphasis on the difficulties in arriving at a statement of Jesus Christ's essence. Here the theologian must be careful not to absolutize linguistic concepts and propositions in relation to Jesus’ person, because all theological statements are limited by the theologian's cultural standpoint. No theologian can define Jesus Christ's essence once and for all time, for Jesus is not a category but the divine event in history who is not subject to the limitations of human concepts. While Niebuhr preferred the “moral” description of Christ, he realized that it ought to be balanced <a id="page_82"/>with “metaphysical or historical descriptions.”<sup><a href="notes.xhtml#ch05-fnr12" id="ch05-fn12">12</a></sup> Because I share his preference for the ethical description of Jesus’ person and work, I also must point out a shortcoming in his picture of Christ. He is right in stressing the <i>dialectical</i> relations of love, hope, obedience, faith, and humility as these virtues are particularized in Jesus’ person, but he does not go far enough. Indeed, it can be said that what Niebuhr says about Christ is incorrect not so much in terms of what he says but in terms of what he fails to say. This absence is so crucial to the biblical picture of Christ that without it the biblical Christ no longer exists. I am referring to Jesus’ identity with the little ones and his proclamation that God wills their freedom. If we are to accept the biblical revelation as the point of departure for a picture of Christ, then we must ask whether it is possible to talk about Christ in any sense without making his identity with the oppressed the starting point. I think not. Indeed, if the analysis in <a href="chapter04.xhtml">Chapter 4</a> is correct, then the biblical Christ is primarily the Liberator of the oppressed from human bondage. He is God's revelation who has come to set the captives free. Therefore, whatever is said about love, hope, obedience, faith, and humility in Christ must be interpreted in the light of his identity with the poor for the purpose of their liberation. While Niebuhr does not exclude Christ's identity with the poor, they nonetheless are not the point of departure of his christological perspective.</p>
<p class="indent"><i>The Definition of Culture:</i> Niebuhr defines culture broadly as that total process and total result of human activity that comprises “language, habits, ideas, beliefs, customs, social organization, inherited artifacts, technical processes, and values.”<sup><a href="notes.xhtml#ch05-fnr13" id="ch05-fn13">13</a></sup> Like his description of Christ, his definition of culture is inadequate in terms of its lack of specificity in relation to the oppressors and oppressed, whites and blacks. The particularity of human existence is important when one begins to speak of Christ's relation to culture. For Christ's relation to culture is not defined in cultural generalities but in terms of the concreteness of human pain and suffering.</p>
<p class="indent">Although Niebuhr's five types provide important insights into the Christ-culture problem, his presentation nevertheless is seriously weakened by his failure to make the necessary distinction between the oppressors and the oppressed as their historical strivings are related to Christ's proclamation of freedom for the captives. For example, if the biblical Christ is the Liberator of the oppressed from the sociopolitical bondage inflicted by the oppressors, then can it be said <a id="page_83"/>that Jesus Christ relates to both cultural expressions in the same way? Of course not! The biblical Christ stands in opposition to all cultural expressions that have their point of departure in human slavery. For the culture of the oppressed, Christ is the Liberator of culture, taking the struggle of the little ones upon himself and transforming their actions for freedom into events of divine liberation.</p>
<p class="indent">Of course, I recognize the complexity and the danger of identifying any human action unqualifiedly with divine revelation, and I will have occasion to say more about this later in this chapter. For the moment I merely want to emphasize the dynamic and open quality of Christ's relation to culture which cannot be limited to Niebuhr's five categories. When the scriptural witness to divine revelation is examined, it cannot be said that Christ has the <i>same</i> attitude toward all cultural expressions. Indeed the message of the Exodus, prophets, and Jesus’ life and death is the proclamation of God's decisive partiality toward the struggles of the unfree. Therefore, if we are to understand Christ's relation to culture, we had better be clear about whose human strivings we speak of, the oppressed or the oppressors.</p>
<p class="head" id="sub2"><b>IDEOLOGY, SOCIAL DETERMINATION, AND BIBLICAL REVELATION</b></p>
<p class="indent">The emphasis on the concreteness of the Christ-culture problem leads naturally to an examination of the relationship of ideology and the social determination of knowledge as each relates to biblical revelation. Sociologists of knowledge make an important distinction between the ideology of thought and thought's social determination. The former often refers to the <i>psychological</i> determination of ideas while the latter designates the <i>sociological</i> element in thinking. Simply put, ideology is deformed thought, meaning that a certain idea or ideas are nothing but the function of the subjective interest of an individual or group. Truth therefore becomes what an individual wishes it to be as defined in accordance with that person's subjective desires. Most sociologists of knowledge agree that ideological thinking can occur at two levels, the particular and the total. “Whereas the particular conception of ideology,” writes Mannheim, “designates only a part of the opponent's assertions as ideologies, and this only in reference to their content, the total conception calls into question the opponent's total <i>Weltanschauung</i> (including his conceptual apparatus), <a id="page_84"/>and attempts to understand these concepts as an outgrowth of the collective life of which he partakes.”<sup><a href="notes.xhtml#ch05-fnr14" id="ch05-fn14">14</a></sup> When warped thinking becomes total, the psychological function of ideas is connected with the social context of the thinker. Therefore ideas can be a distortion of reality not only because of the subjective or psychological wishes of the thinker, but because the social a priori, from which his thinking emerges, is blind to certain aspects of the truth.</p>
<p class="indent">This brings us to the social determination of thought. In contrast to ideology, social determination is not necessarily a distortion of thinking. It is the social a priori in thought, the axiological grid without which thought cannot exist. Social determination deals with the formation of thought, the base from which thought's categories emerge. This is what sociologists of knowledge mean when they contend that social reality precedes thinking.</p>
<p class="indent">With this brief analysis of the distinction between ideology and the social determination of knowledge, it is now possible to relate them to biblical revelation. Here we are concerned about the following questions: What is the truth of biblical revelation? How is divine truth connected with the social a priori of Scripture? What is the ideological distortion of biblical truth, both in the particular and in the total senses? What is the connection between the social a priori of oppressors and oppressed as their thought processes are related to the truth of biblical revelation?</p>
<p class="indent">If the previous discussion of biblical revelation is correct (<a href="chapter04.xhtml">Chap. 4</a>), then it is clear that the truth of the Bible is the story of the call of God's people from slavery to freedom. There is no understanding of this truth except through the historical consciousness of an oppressed people struggling for liberation. For divine truth is not an idea but an event breaking into the brokenness of history, bestowing wholeness in wretched places. Only one who has experienced and is experiencing the truth of divine liberation can tell the story of how God's people shall overcome.</p>
<p class="indent">Ideology in the context of biblical revelation is interpreting Scripture from an axiological perspective that contradicts the divine will to liberate the poor and the downtrodden. It is forgetting about the Exodus, the covenant, and the prophets’ proclamation of God's liberating deeds in history. Ideological distortion in its particular sense occurred many times during Israel's history, especially during the rise of great prophets. The rulers in Israel began to interpret <a id="page_85"/>God's story in the light of the rich and the powerful in the community. They conveniently forgot that they were once slaves in Egypt until Yahweh heard Israel's cry and delivered it. This Exodus event and the covenant that followed disclosed the truth of Yahweh's revelation as the liberation of the weak. The message of the prophets reminded the people of Yahweh's mighty acts of the past and proclaimed Yahweh's eschatological future wherein divine justice will be realized.</p>
<p class="indent">Ideology in the <i>particular</i> sense is telling the biblical story in the light of the economic and social interests of a few. It is the interpretation of Scripture as if the poor and their liberation are incidental to the gospel message. Ideology, on the particular level, is especially a serious danger to oppressed people who are afraid of the political consequences of the divine Word in their midst. The risks of fighting against oppression can lead to passive resignation. That was why the people of Israel said to Moses: “Is it because there are no graves in Egypt that you have taken us away to die in the wilderness? What have you done to us, in bringing us out of Egypt? Is not this what we said to you in Egypt, ‘Let us alone and let us serve the Egyptians’?” (Exod. 14:11–12 <small>RSV</small>). The people's fear of the approaching Egyptians distorted their perception of divine revelation. They forgot about Yahweh's promise to their fathers and the partial realization of the promise in his mighty acts in Egypt. Could not the same God protect them from the Egyptians? That was why Moses said: “Fear not, stand firm, and see the salvation of the Lord, which he will work for you today; for the Egyptians whom you see today, you shall never see again” (Exod. 14:13 <small>RSV</small>).</p>
<p class="indent">Ideology on the particular level is also a danger for persons in the oppressed community who achieve social and economic prosperity. For personal reasons, they conveniently forget the central element in the divine story. This was the problem of the ruler who asked: “Good Teacher, what shall I do to inherit eternal life?” (Luke 18:18 <small>RSV</small>). Of course, he knew the commandments, and had observed them from his youth. But by asking the question he also had sensed a contradiction between his life-style and the truth of Jesus’ presence. “One thing you still lack,” Jesus said. “Sell all that you have and distribute to the poor, and you will have treasure in heaven; and come, follow me” (Luke 18:22 <small>RSV</small>). But his riches prevented him from living the truth revealed in Jesus’ presence.</p>
<a id="page_86"/>
<p class="indent">Ideology in the <i>total</i> sense represents that form of thinking whose intellectual grid excludes a priori the truth of the biblical story. This is characteristic of people who do not think in categories intrinsic to the story of divine liberation. They think in categories that contradict the social a priori of biblical revelation and its form as story. Truth is often interpreted in legalistic and philosophical categories. Its content is usually information about God, to be known either through assent to doctrine as exegeted by scholars or through rational, philosophical discourse. During Jesus’ time, certain Pharisees identified truth with abstract ritual laws as interpreted by the scribes. The content of truth was limited to the interpretation of scholars and teachers of the Law. Because Jesus did not always use their truth language but spoke of truth also in parables and through events where the sick are being healed, they were disturbed by his words and deeds. For Jesus, divine truth was not an abstract Law but God's salvation event happening in history. That was why he spoke the truth in story form. When asked, “Who is my neighbor?” (Luke 10:29f.), he did not offer an abstract ethical discourse on the limits and meaning of duty. He merely told a story about a man who was robbed and beaten. A priest and a Levite passed by on the other side. But a Samaritan had compassion, and took care of his wounds and then paid for his restoration to health. Then Jesus asked: “Which of these three, do you think, proved neighbor to the man who fell among the robbers?” (Luke 10:36 <small>RSV</small>). The answer was obvious to everyone who heard.</p>
<p class="indent">If the truth of the biblical story is God's liberation of the oppressed, then the social a priori of oppressors excludes the possibility of their hearing and seeing the truth of divine presence, because the conceptual universe of their thought contradicts the story of divine liberation. Only the poor and the weak have the axiological grid necessary for the hearing and the doing of the divine will disclosed in their midst. Of course this does not mean that all who are poor will actually hear the Word and do the will of the One who is the Word. Often the poor internalize the values of their victimizers, thereby closing their consciousness to the events of freedom in their history. It does mean, however, that the social determination necessary for faith in God's liberating presence in Jesus Christ is present in the social existence of poor people in a way that it is not present among the rich. Since the gospel is liberation from bondage, and since the poor are obvious victims of oppression because of the inordinate power of the rich, it is <a id="page_87"/>clear that the poor have little to lose and everything to gain from Jesus Christ's presence in history. In contrast the rich have little to gain and everything to lose, if gain and loss are defined by values of this earthly sphere. This difference in socioeconomic status between the rich and the poor affected the way in which each responded to Jesus, and Jesus to them. While there were few of the rich and powerful who responded to Jesus’ message because of the demands of Jesus’ proclamation of the Kingdom, the poor heard him gladly and he received them with joy. Jesus came to heal them, to restore health to their diseased bodies and broken spirits. “Those who are well have no need of a physician, but those who are sick; I came not to call the righteous, but sinners” (Mark 2:17 <small>RSV</small>).</p>
<p class="indent">In view of the distinction between ideology and social a priori and our contention that divine truth is God's liberation of the weak from oppression, the question that theologians must ask is not whether their theology is determined by social interest, but rather, <i>whose</i> social interest, the oppressed or the oppressors? From the biblical standpoint it is misleading merely to say that ideology is the identification of God's Word with the aspirations of a social group. By that definition the Bible itself is a book of religious ideologies, because the prophets and Jesus had little difficulty in equating God's revelation with the freedom of the poor. It is true, however, that God's revelation is never static and neither is God's Word ever at the mercy of human subjectivity. God's Word remains <i>God</i>'s Word, and not that of the oppressed. But God is free to choose the words of the oppressed as the divine Word, thereby liberating them to a new existence. This God has done and is doing by being present with the poor. Therefore, theology that does not emerge from the historical consciousness of the poor is ideology.</p>
<p class="head" id="sub3"><b>BLACK THEOLOGY AND IDEOLOGY</b></p>
<p class="indent">Black Theology, denying the charge that it is a mere reduction to current black politics, asserts that Christian theology begins and ends with divine revelation. While divine revelation takes place in history, God's reality can never be reduced merely to human goals and struggles in the historical sphere. The divine is more than what we think, perceive, and dream at any moment in time, and it is this “more” or otherness in divine reality that makes it necessary for theology to <a id="page_88"/>recognize its conceptual limitations. Divine revelation, about which theology speaks, cannot be boxed into the linguistic formulations derived from human experience. Any theology, therefore, that fails to accept the finitude of its categories, speaking instead as if it knows the whole truth and nothing but the truth, is guilty of blasphemy, that is, of an ideological distortion of divine reality.</p>
<p class="indent">Naturally the mere assertion that Black Theology accepts the above strictures on ideology is not itself a sufficient reply to the charge of its critics. In order to take seriously the danger of ideology and its implications for theological discourse, Black Theology must ask and answer the question, What is Christ's relation to human culture? As we seek to deal with that question, it must be recognized that the answer varies from situation to situation, from people to people, and from time to time. For example, God's relation to black and white cultures in America is not identical. When it is considered, on the one hand, that George Washington, Thomas Jefferson, and Richard Nixon are representatives of the white way of life, and on the other hand, that the biblical God is the God whose will is disclosed in the liberation of slaves, then the divine relationship to white culture is obvious. The biblical God stands in <i>opposition</i> to the culture of slave masters, who idolatrously usurp the power to define humanity on the assumption of white superiority. Since white theology has not transcended the axiological perspective of white culture (<a href="chapter03.xhtml">Chap. 3</a>), we must conclude that white theology is an ideological distortion of the gospel of Jesus.</p>
<p class="indent">The identification of white theology with ideology is not intended as a cavalier put-down of fellow theologians not of my genetic origin. Rather, this conclusion is derived from a careful reading of white theological sources in America from Jonathan Edwards to Langdon Gilkey. Here I found, with few exceptions, that these interpreters of the gospel are so bound to the social a priori of white culture that the liberation of people of color is at best a peripheral theme. And even when the liberation of black or red people is found on the periphery of their theologies, it is a liberation theme that is usually derived from white culture rather than biblical revelation. This is due not so much to the bad intentions of particular white theologians as it is to the social context in which their thinking occurs. Indeed, because the values of white culture are antithetical to biblical revelation, it is impossible to be white (culturally speaking) and also think biblically. Biblical thinking is <i>liberated</i> thought, i.e., thinking that is not entrapped by <a id="page_89"/>social categories of the dominant culture. If white theologians are to understand this thought process, they must undergo a conversion wherein they are given, by the Holy Spirit, a new way of thinking and acting in the world, defined and limited by God's will to liberate the oppressed. To think biblically is to think in the light of the liberating interest of the oppressed. Any other starting point is a contradiction of the social a priori of Scripture.</p>
<p class="indent">Since the biblical God stands against the culture of oppressors, must we assume that God is the God of the culture of the oppressed? This is an important but difficult question. It is important because of its ideological dangers. It is difficult because it must be answered both negatively and positively. The positive and negative character of God's relation to oppressed people's struggle is an essential ingredient of the gospel message. In this paradoxical situation wherein God's No and Yes must be spoken, the theologian must be sensitive to both sides of the paradox, realizing that the truth of one side is dependent upon the affirmation of the other. Generally the choice of one emphasis in relation to the other depends on the situation, the people, and the time. When oppressed people are feeling proud of their successes in the struggle of freedom, and thus begin to think that <i>any</i> action is justifiable, as if their ethical judgment is infallible, then theologians, preachers, and others <i>in</i> the oppressed community must remind the people of the utter distinction between their words and God's Word. But when the oppressed are passive and afraid of the struggle of freedom, then they must be reminded that the gospel is identical with their liberation from political bondage.</p>
<p class="indent">The Christian theologian, therefore, is one whose hermeneutical consciousness for an interpretation of the gospel is defined by the oppressed people's struggle of freedom, seeking to adhere to the delicate balance of social existence and divine revelation. In this situation, the theologian must accept the burden and the risk laid upon him or her by both social existence and divine revelation, realizing that they must be approached dialectically, and thus their exact relationship cannot be solved once and for all time. There can only be tentative solutions which must be revised for every generation and for different settings. When theologians speak about God, they must be careful that their language takes account of the ambiguity and frailty of human speech through humility and openness. They can never assume that they have spoken the last word. But the recognition of the <a id="page_90"/>limitation should not lead to the conclusion that there is no word to be said. Indeed the clue to our word and God's Word is found in human history when divine revelation and social existence are joined together as one reality. From God's initiative alone the divine enters our social existence and discloses what is “wholly other” and what is “like” God. If we take seriously the clue disclosed in God's Incarnation, namely, the cross and resurrection of Jesus, then we know that we have a way of cutting through the maze of political and social confusions. Because the divine has entered the human situation in Jesus and has issued God's judgment against poverty, sickness, and oppression, persons who fight against these inhumanities become instruments of God's Word.</p>
<p class="indent">This is the dialectic of Christian thought: God enters into the social context of human existence and appropriates the ideas and actions of the oppressed as God's own. When this event of liberation occurs in thought and praxis, the words and actions of the oppressed become the Word and Action of God. They no longer belong to the oppressed. Indeed, the word of the oppressed becomes God's Word insofar as the former recognize it not as their own but as given to them through divine grace. The oppressed have been elected, not because of the intrinsic value of their word or action but because of God's grace and freedom to be with the weak in troubled times.</p>
<p class="indent">Thus the source of the distinction between the oppressed and the oppressors, the elected and the excluded, is not a body of rational principles derived from human experience but is, rather, God, the Creator and Redeemer of human life. The identification of the story of liberation with God's story, which troubles my critics, is not derived from the human situation. Christian theology does not move from human needs to God, but from God's revelation to our needs. This is consistent with my contention that the central message of the Incarnation is the proclamation that the divine has entered the human situation so as to redeem humanity. To be sure, there is an absolutely distinctive character in divine revelation, but God has chosen not to apply the radical otherness of divine existence to the struggle of the oppressed for freedom but to the oppressors who make people unfree. God came and is present now, in order to destroy the oppressors’ power to hold people in captivity.</p>
<p class="indent">The task of theology is to show the significance of the oppressed's struggle against inhuman powers, relating the people's struggle to <a id="page_91"/>God's intention to set them free. Theologians must make the gospel clear in a particular social context so that God's people will know that their struggle for freedom is God's struggle too. The victory over evil is certain because God has taken up the cause of the oppressed, promising today what was promised to the people of Israel while they were yet slaves in Egypt.</p>
<p class="block">I have heard the groaning of the people of Israel whom the Egyptians hold in bondage and I have remembered my covenant. Say therefore to the people of Israel, “I am the Lord, and I will bring you out from under the burdens of the Egyptians, and I will deliver you from their bondage, and I will redeem you with an outstretched arm and with great acts of judgment, and I will take you for my people, and I will be your God….” (Exodus 6:5–7a <small>RSV</small>)</p>
<p class="body-text0">Because we know that we can trust the promise of God, we also know that the oppressed will be fully liberated. Indeed their present struggle for liberation is God making real the promise to set them free.</p>
<p class="indent">The theological assertion that “the struggle of the oppressed is God's struggle” is not religious projection and neither is it a statement which moves from the human situation to divine revelation. It could be the former only if its validity were tested merely subjectively and not weighed against the concrete realities of historical experience. Whatever may be said about the biblical faith and black faith derived from Scripture, neither was based on a feeling of inwardness separated from historical experience. Both Israel and later the black community took history seriously and continued to test the validity of their faith in the context of historical struggle. Indeed the faith of Israel and of black people was an <i>historical</i> faith, that is, a trust in the faithfulness and loyalty of God in the midst of historical troubles. It was not from introspection, nor from mystical meditation, but from the faithful reading of history that Israel and later the black community came to believe that the God of the Exodus and of Jesus was struggling to liberate broken humanity to wholeness. This is why Absalom Jones proclaimed, on the occasion of the abolition of the slave trade, that “the history of the world shows us, that the deliverance of the children of Israel from their bondage is not the only instance, in which it has pleased God to appear on behalf of oppressed and distressed nations.”<sup><a href="notes.xhtml#ch05-fnr15" id="ch05-fn15">15</a></sup></p>
<a id="page_92"/>
<p class="indent">Because the assertion that “the struggle of the oppressed is God's struggle” is a statement about God's initiative and not ours, we are granted the freedom to share in the divine movement of liberation. Some of my critics correctly remind me of the ideological dangers when God's struggle is identified with human actions, especially in relation to revolutionary violence and reconciliation. Being God's elect people does not entitle the oppressed to usurp the place of God and interpret divine reconciliation as vengeance. “Vengeance is mine…says the Lord” (Rom. 12:19; cf. Deut. 32:35). But given the importance and legitimacy of God's otherness in human history, the question nevertheless remains: <i>Who</i> decides when reconciliation has issued into vengeance? Who decides when the speech of the oppressed has lost its authentic humility or proper openness? Who decides when theology is ideology? Who decides when the oppressed are truly listening and hearing the Word of God as God invades the brokenness of their situation? As a black theologian who has experienced the dehumanizing effects of white theological reflections, I do not care to rest the future of black humanity upon the judgment of white theologians here or abroad. The decision about these critical questions must rest with those who are struggling for liberation as they encounter the eventful presence of the One who is the source of their fight for freedom.</p>
<p class="indent">The crux of the difference between my perspective on theology and ideology and that of my sympathetic white critics cannot be reduced to semantics alone. The difference is truly semantic to the extent that our difference in language points to radically different social contexts, which can best be summed up with the terms “black” and “white.” Because they do not share the “black context” as defined by slavery and colonization, our common theological background and sympathies become incidental. The shape of our different communities and the theologies that arise from them are not determined by our common affirmation that “Jesus is Lord.” These communities and theologies are formed by the will of white people to oppress others not of their genetic origin. The “others” become a community only when they collectively decide to resist humiliation and suffering. Since my white critics, despite their well-meaning concerns and sympathies with Black Theology, have developed their theologies from the tradition of whiteness which is responsible for the oppression of the black community, I must remain cautious, even though I agree <i>in principle</i> <a id="page_93"/>with Barth's strictures on ideology. Checks against ideological language in theology are not derived <i>abstractly</i> from the Word of God, because God's Word is not an abstract object, but is the liberating Subject in the lives of the oppressed struggling for freedom. I believe that some of my critics probably would agree with that linguistic formulation. But the real test of the referent in the formulation is found in whether we are led to be involved on the same side in the historical struggles for freedom. We will have to wait for the answer to that observation.</p>
<p class="head" id="sub4"><b>IDEOLOGY AND THE BLACK STORY</b></p>
<p class="indent">In the final analysis we must admit that there is no way to “prove objectively” that we are telling the truth about ourselves or about the One who has called us into being. There is no place we can stand that will remove us from the limitations of history and thus enable us to tell the whole truth without the risk of ideological distortion. As long as we live and have our being in time and space, absolute truth is impossible. But this concession is not an affirmation of unrestricted relativity. We can and must say something about the world that is not reducible to our own subjectivity. That trans-subjective “something” is expressed in story, indeed is embodied in story.</p>
<p class="indent">Story is the history of individuals coming together in the struggle to shape life according to commonly held values. The Jewish story is found in the Hebrew Bible and the Rabbinic traditions. The early Christian story is told in the Old and New Testaments, with the emphasis on the latter as the fulfillment of the former. The white American story is found in the history of European settlements struggling against dark forests and savage people to found a new nation. The Black American story is recorded in the songs, tales, and narratives of African slaves and their descendants, as they attempted to survive with dignity in a land inimical to their existence. Every people has a story to tell, something to say to themselves, their children, and to the world about how they think and live, as they determine and affirm their reason for being. The story both expresses and participates in the miracle of moving from nothing to something, from nonbeing to being.</p>
<p class="indent">When people ask me, “How do you <i>know</i> that what you say is true?” my reply is: “Ultimately, I don't know and neither does anybody else.” <a id="page_94"/>We are creatures of history, not divine beings. I cannot claim infinite knowledge. What I can do is to bear witness to my story, to tell it and live it, as the story grips my life and pulls me out of nothingness into being. However, I am not imprisoned within my story. Indeed, when I understand truth as story, I am more likely to be open to other people's truth stories. As I listen to other stories, I am invited to move out of the subjectivity of my own story into another realm of thinking and acting. The same is true for others when I tell my story.</p>
<p class="indent">It is only when stories are abstracted from a concrete situation and codified into Law or dogma that their life-blood is taken away and thus a people begins to think that its ways of thinking and living are the only real possibilities. When people can no longer listen to other people's stories, they become enclosed within their own social context, treating their distorted visions of reality as the whole truth. And then they feel that they must destroy other stories, which bear witness that life can be lived in another way. White people's decimation of red people and enslavement of black people in North America are examples of attempts to deprive people of their stories, in order to establish the white story as the only truth in history. That was why slaves were not permitted to communicate in their African languages and why red people were placed on reservations. White people were saying that black and red stories were lies and superstitions that have no place in a “civilized” country. From some perspectives, the white story of black enslavement may be a “valid” story, but from the perspective of the victims it is a tale of terror and bloodshed. From the biblical view it is an epic of rebellion, the usurpation of God's rule. In other words it is ideology.</p>
<p class="indent">Story can serve as a check against ideological thinking, especially from the biblical perspective. If theologians wish to retain the dialectic of story as a crucial ingredient of the gospel message, then their language about that message must speak less of philosophical principles and more of concrete events in the lives of the people. We must assume that the biblical story has its own integrity and truth independent of our subjective states. We are not free to read just anything into the biblical story. Whatever may be someone's view about the Scripture from another faith standpoint, anyone who reads the Bible sympathetically can hardly overlook its central focal point: the proclamation that God in Christ has come to redeem humankind. From this assumption, we must move through human history, Christian and <a id="page_95"/>non-Christian, asking what is the relation of God's story in Christ to human stories, especially to our own. By assuming that the biblical story exists independently of our stories and that it lays a claim upon us in our contemporary existence, <i>we are forced to move out of our subjectivity and to hear the Word that we do not possess</i>. And if we accept the One to whom the Bible points, then we know that the validity of our stories in the world is dependent upon God's affirmation of us as God's own possession. God's story becomes our story through the faith made possible by the grace of God's presence with us.</p>
<p class="indent">Although the biblical story is the major check against the limitations of our vision of truth, it is not the only one. There is the Christian tradition, the historical accounts of how others, at different periods of history, understood the story of Scripture: Cyprian, Luther, and Elizabeth Cady Stanton, as well as Nat Turner, David Walker, and Sojourner Truth. We take account of such people not because they are criteria for reading the biblical story, but because they were members of Christian communities who attempted to read the biblical story in the light of their struggles. By really hearing what they said, we are taken out of the subjectivity of our present. For if ideology is to be reduced or avoided, it will be through listening to others outside of our own time and situation.</p>
<p class="indent">Because the Christian gospel lays a claim upon us that pushes us into relation to others, we must also be open to stories not specifically of the biblical tradition, to the stories of other religions from Africa, Asia, and elsewhere. To listen to what another culture is saying about life does not mean that we have to relinquish the biblical faith. That is neither possible nor even desirable. Indeed if one's faith is true to life and is thus the defender of life, as the biblical faith most certainly is, then the faith itself forces one to remain open to life as it is lived anywhere. By listening to another who is not of my faith, I am affirming my own faith insofar as it is the defender of life. Through this process, I am permitted to learn from another and to share with him or her the struggles of life. Indeed it is when we refuse to listen to another story that our own story becomes ideological, that is, a closed system incapable of hearing the truth.</p>
<p class="indent">Because truth is inseparable from the story of my life, I must recognize that objectivity in thought is achieved through subjectivity, i.e., the dialectic encounter of self in the situation of an Other wherein we are grasped by the One who is other than self. In story, truth is <a id="page_96"/>objective in the sense that what we know as truth is not self or derived from human consciousness. Truth is an event that happens <i>to</i> us and often <i>against</i> our will. However, truth does not destroy consciousness; truth affirms consciousness in the struggle to be through an affirmation of its right to be. This is what I mean by the Word of God in the lives of black people.</p>
<p class="indent">In black religion, story is thought of in two ways. First, there is the story of the people as a whole. This story goes back to the memories of Africa and the experience of being taken into slavery in North America. It includes the strivings of the people to survive the ordeal of servitude and to retain a measure of togetherness in struggle. But even when slavery was declared illegal, our struggle did not end, for we had to deal with the Ku Klux Klan and other self-appointed protectors of white values. The crucial point here is the universality of the experience of suffering. The animal tales frequently carry this theme. For instance Sis Goose, seized by Br'er Fox, demanded a trial. Br'er Fox obligingly dragged her to the courthouse where she found that “de sheriff, he wus er fox, an de judge, he was er fox, en der tourneys, dey was fox, en all de jurymen, dey wus foxes, too.” It followed as the night the day that “dey ’victed her and dey ’scuted her, and dey picked her bones.”<sup><a href="notes.xhtml#ch05-fnr16" id="ch05-fn16">16</a></sup> But despite, or because of, the futility of seeking justice in white people's courts, black people created structures of value through story that enabled them to survive. The victories of Stagolee and of High John the Conqueror embodied their struggle for dignity. Above all there was Jesus, the “Captain who has never lost a battle.” And they responded with shouts of joy and praise, asking God to “throw round us your strong arms of protection” and to “bind us together in love and union.” They pleaded to God: “Build us up where we are torn down and strengthen us where we are weak.”<sup><a href="notes.xhtml#ch05-fnr17" id="ch05-fn17">17</a></sup></p>
<p class="indent">At this point the black story moves to the second level, that of <i>personal</i> story. Personal stories are accounts of individual triumphs in struggle. They are recorded in the slave narratives and personal testimonies. They include the narratives and speeches of Frederick Douglass, Harriet Tubman, and Sojourner Truth. In personal testimony a witness is made in the community of how a particular person survived through trials and tribulations, as in the case of Harriet Tubman's daring escape and repeated successes in freeing other slaves. But the content of personal story is not limited to the past and present struggles of freedom. Because black stories were dialectically <a id="page_97"/>related to the biblical story, the former, like the latter, moved into the future, “the time when there would be no time.” Here story is a personal hope that one day this life of suffering will be over. This hope is expressed in a song by Mahalia Jackson:</p>
<p class="para1">One of these mornings,</p>
<p class="para">One of these mornings</p>
<p class="para">I'm gonna lay down my cross</p>
<p class="para">And get my crown.</p>
<p class="para1">Just as soon as my feet strike Zion,</p>
<p class="para">Lay down my heavy burden,</p>
<p class="para">Put on my robe in glory, Lord,</p>
<p class="para">Sing, Lord, and tell my story.</p>
<p class="para1">Up over hills and mountains, Lord,</p>
<p class="para">To the Christian fountain,</p>
<p class="para">All of God's sons and daughters, Lord,</p>
<p class="para">Drinking that old healing water.<sup><a href="notes.xhtml#ch05-fnr18" id="ch05-fn18">18</a></sup></p>
<p class="indent1">Whether we speak of the story of the whole people or that of the individual, one thing is certain: we are speaking of the struggle to survive and the belief that there is meaning in life that extends beyond the structures created by oppressors. If someone asks me, “Jim, how can <i>you</i> believe that? What is the <i>evidence</i> of its truth?” my reply is quite similar to the testimonies of the Fathers and Mothers of the Black Church: Let me tell you a story about a man called Jesus who was born in a stable in Bethlehem and raised in an obscure village called Nazareth. When the time had come, he was baptized by John the Baptist. After John's death, he went throughout the region of Galilee preaching that the Kingdom is coming, repent and believe the gospel. The Kingdom is the new creation where the hungry are fed, the sick healed, and the oppressed liberated. It is the restoration of humanity to its wholeness. This man Jesus was killed because of his threat to the order of injustice. But he was resurrected as Lord, thereby making good God's promise to bring freedom to all who are weak and helpless. This resurrection is the guarantee that Jesus is the Christ who is with us now in our present and will be with us forever and ever.</p>
<a id="page_98"/>
<p class="indent">I was told this story by my mother and father, and it was recited again and again at Macedonia A.M.E. Church in Bearden, Arkansas. They told this story as the truth of their lives, the foundation of their struggle. I came to know this story as the truth in my own struggle in situations of trouble. Jesus is now my story, which sustains and holds me together in struggle. I cannot and have no desire to “prove” my story. All I can hope or wish to do is to bear witness to it, as this story leads me to an openness to other stories. Through this process, I hope to avoid imprisonment in my own subjectivity and perhaps to learn how to hear the truth when spoken by others and to speak the truth when called to give an account of the hope that is in me (I Pet. 3:15).</p>
</div>
</body>
</html>