<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>chapter03</title>
<link href="ebook_style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
<meta content="urn:uuid:5bf1d25e-4978-4604-b0f7-22d24fac0880" name="Adept.expected.resource"/>
</head>
<body>
<div>
<a id="page_36"/>
<h2 class="chap_tit"><span class="underline">CHAPTER 3</span></h2>
<p class="chapz"><b>The Social Context of Theology</b></p>
<p class="indent">The dialectic of theology and its sources pushes us to examine more closely the social context of theological language. Because Christian theology is <i>human</i> speech about God, it is always related to historical situations, and thus all of its assertions are culturally limited. H. Richard Niebuhr makes this point forcefully: “Whatever be the case in other human inquiries there is no such thing as disinterestedness in theology, since no one can speak of God or gods at all save as valued beings or as values which cannot be apprehended save by a willing, feeling, responding self.”<sup><a href="notes.xhtml#ch03-fnr1" id="ch03-fn1">1</a></sup> Here Niebuhr rightly connects theology with social existence. Although God, the subject of theology, is eternal, theology itself is, like those who articulate it, limited by history and time. “Though we direct our thought to eternal and transcendent beings, it is not eternal and transcendent; though we regard the universal, the image of the universal in our mind is not a universal image.”<sup><a href="notes.xhtml#ch03-fnr2" id="ch03-fn2">2</a></sup> It is a finite image, limited by the temporality and particularity of our existence. Theology is not universal language; it is <i>interested</i> language and thus is always a reflection of the goals and aspirations of a particular people in a definite social setting.</p>
<p class="head" id="sub1"><b>FEUERBACH, MARX, AND THE SOCIOLOGY OF KNOWLEDGE</b></p>
<p class="indent1">The anthropological character of theological speech was asserted with rare philosophical clarity by Ludwig Feuerbach. Reacting against Hegelian idealism, which equated the rational with the real and the real with the rational, Feuerbach proclaimed the concreteness of reality in its social and political manifestations. The clue to the meaning of the real, he insisted, is not found in philosophical abstractions but in <a id="page_37"/>concrete life, its feelings, wants, and needs. The uncovering of truth, therefore, is not identical with the rational investigation of the unfolding of the Absolute Idea, said Feuerbach, but with the analysis of the common experience of humanity. Theology is not what theologians claim it to be, i.e., a reflection upon an eternal being; “theology is anthropology.”<sup><a href="notes.xhtml#ch03-fnr3" id="ch03-fn3">3</a></sup> What theologians mistake for God is nothing but the “latent nature” of humanity. Such is the case because</p>
<p class="block">Man cannot get beyond his true nature. He may indeed by means of the imagination conceive individuals of a so-called higher kind, but he can never get loose from his species, his nature…. A being's understanding is its sphere of vision. As far as thou seest, so far extends thy nature.<sup><a href="notes.xhtml#ch03-fnr4" id="ch03-fn4">4</a></sup></p>
<p class="indent1">By limiting humanity to its nature, Feuerbach asserted the social and psychological limitations of all human knowledge. Thus the idea of God is humanity itself projected to infinity. Divinity is humanity transcending itself while remaining enclosed within itself.</p>
<p class="block">That which is to man the self-existent, the highest being, to which he can conceive nothing higher—that is to him the Divine Being. How then should he inquire concerning this being, what he is in himself? If God were an object to a bird, he would be a winged being: the bird knows nothing higher, nothing more blissful, than the winged condition…. Such as are a man's thought and disposition, such is his God; so much worth as a man has, so much and no more has his God. Consciousness of God is self-consciousness, knowledge of God is self-knowledge.<sup><a href="notes.xhtml#ch03-fnr5" id="ch03-fn5">5</a></sup></p>
<p class="indent1">Whatever may be the theological and philosophical weaknesses of Feuerbach's view of religion,<sup><a href="notes.xhtml#ch03-fnr6" id="ch03-fn6">6</a></sup> he nonetheless challenges theologians to take seriously the anthropological undergirdings of their statements. It is difficult to ignore the cogency of Feuerbach's logic in view of the obvious sociological context of human speech. What people think about God cannot be divorced from their place and time in a definite history and culture. While God may exist in some heavenly city beyond time and space, human beings cannot transcend history. They are limited to the specificity of their finite nature. And even when theologians claim to point beyond history because of the <a id="page_38"/>possibility given by the Creator of history, the divine image disclosed in their language is shaped by their place in time. Theology is <i>subjective</i> speech about God, a speech that tells us far more about the hopes and dreams of certain God-talkers than about the Maker and Creator of heaven and earth.</p>
<p class="indent">The political and economic implications of Feuerbachian materialism were pressed to radical consequences by Karl Marx. While praising Feuerbach for his critique of Hegelian idealism, Marx contended that Feuerbach failed to pursue his line of criticism to its logical conclusion. Marx agreed with Feuerbach: thinking begins with sense data; perception not conception is the clue to reality. But Marx rejected Feuerbach's stopping at the stage of “contemplative sensuousness,” that is, with merely thinking correctly about the world instead of changing it. While Feuerbach remained satisfied with the description of a “correct consciousness about an <i>existing</i> fact,” Marx insisted that it is necessary to overthrow the “existing state of things.”<sup><a href="notes.xhtml#ch03-fnr7" id="ch03-fn7">7</a></sup></p>
<p class="indent">One of Marx's chief contributions was his disclosure of the ideological character of bourgeois thought, indicating the connection between the “ruling <i>material</i> force of society” and the “ruling <i>intellectual</i> force.” Ideas do not have an independent existence but are from beginning to end a social product. “The ruling ideas,” writes Marx, “are nothing more than the ideal expression of the dominant material relationships grasped as ideas.”<sup><a href="notes.xhtml#ch03-fnr8" id="ch03-fn8">8</a></sup> Here he affirms not only the connection between sensory data and the pursuit of truth, but also the role of economics and politics in the definition of truth. Contrary to Feuerbach, truth is not simply the contemplation of sensuous nature; such a procedure leads to a philosophical abstraction and thus a distortion of the true nature of reality as sensuous <i>activity</i>, i.e., as praxis. The task of philosophy is not merely to interpret the world but to change it.<sup><a href="notes.xhtml#ch03-fnr9" id="ch03-fn9">9</a></sup> Truth is a question not only of what is but of what ought to be. What <i>is</i>, is determined by the existing societal relations of material production, with the ruling class controlling the means of production as well as the intellectual forces which justify the present political arrangements. What <i>ought to be</i> is defined by what can be through the revolutionary praxis of the proletarian class, overthrowing unjust societal conditions. Thus the future is introduced into the historical process, wherein thought is shaped by open human possibilities. Truth is not “a question of theory but is a practical question. In practice man must prove the truth,”<sup><a href="notes.xhtml#ch03-fnr10" id="ch03-fn10">10</a></sup> by destroying the <a id="page_39"/>existing relations of untruth. Feuerbach's mistake was that “he direct[ed] too much attention to nature and too little to politics.”<sup><a href="notes.xhtml#ch03-fnr11" id="ch03-fn11">11</a></sup> For if he had recognized the significance of politics as the real clue to the correct understanding of nature, he then would have realized the real import of religious self-alienation. Self-alienation as revealed in religious self-projections is nothing but a reflection of the contradictions in the material world. The ruling class promotes religion because it justifies the present material relations and also because it serves as a sedative for the oppressed, making them remain content with humiliation and suffering. As long as the oppressed believe that their future is found in a heavenly world, they will not focus on the needed revolutionary praxis to change this world. While Feuerbach pointed out the unreality of the heavenly world, he did not show its revolutionary connection with this world. For “once the earthly family is discovered to be the secret of the holy family, the former must then itself be criticized in theory and revolutionized in practice.”<sup><a href="notes.xhtml#ch03-fnr12" id="ch03-fn12">12</a></sup></p>
<p class="indent">The importance of Marx for our purposes is his insistence that thought has no independence from social existence. In view of his convincing assertion that “consciousness can never be anything else than conscious existence,”<sup><a href="notes.xhtml#ch03-fnr13" id="ch03-fn13">13</a></sup> theologians must ask, “What is the connection between dominant material relations and the ruling theological ideas in a given society?” And even if they do not accept the rigid causality of so-called orthodox Marxists, theologians will find it hard to avoid the truth that their thinking about things divine is closely intertwined with the “manifestations of actual life.”<sup><a href="notes.xhtml#ch03-fnr14" id="ch03-fn14">14</a></sup> A serious encounter with Marx will make theologians confess their limitations, their inability to say anything about God which is not at the same time a statement about the social context of their own existence. Nor will an appeal to the objectivity of revelation solve the theological dilemma. Although the revelation of God may be universal and eternal, theological talk about that revelation is filtered through human experience, which is limited by social realities. Therefore, not only the questions which theologians ask but the answers given in their discourse about the gospel are limited by their social perceptions and thus largely a reflection of the material conditions of a given society. Theology arises out of life and thus reflects a people's struggle to create meaning in life.</p>
<p class="indent">Marx's critique of bourgeois thought influenced the proponents of the sociology of knowledge, of which Karl Mannheim, Werner Stark, <a id="page_40"/>Peter Berger, and Thomas Luckmann are prominent representatives. While most advocates of this sociological discipline<sup><a href="notes.xhtml#ch03-fnr15" id="ch03-fn15">15</a></sup> move beyond Marx in their insistence that there is a distinction between the “social element in thinking” (sociology of knowledge) and the “political element in thought”<sup><a href="notes.xhtml#ch03-fnr16" id="ch03-fn16">16</a></sup> (ideology), yet they all agree with Marx's contention that “consciousness…is a social product.”<sup><a href="notes.xhtml#ch03-fnr17" id="ch03-fn17">17</a></sup> This does not mean that consciousness is a mechanical duplication of social reality. Marx himself is emphatic in his concern to retain the freedom and spontaneity of thought and the point that ideas influence social structures. As his Thesis 3 puts it: “It is men that change circumstances, and [thus] the educator himself needs educating.”<sup><a href="notes.xhtml#ch03-fnr18" id="ch03-fn18">18</a></sup> The sociologists of knowledge clarify Marx's point by emphasizing the <i>reciprocity</i> between ideas and social reality (that is, between subject and object or superstructure and substructure), so that an investigation of the latter cannot fail to provide essential clues into the conceptual universe of the former. This is what Stark means by such phrases as “social a priori,” “social determination,” and “axiological system.” Berger and Luckmann have a similar point in mind with the phrase “the social construction of reality.” Ideas do not have an existence separate from life but arise out of a framework of reality constructed by people.</p>
<p class="indent">Marx's chief concern was to uncover the ideological distortion of bourgeois thought which he believed could be overcome through the revolutionary praxis of the proletariat. While the proponents of the sociology of knowledge are greatly motivated by Marx's critique of the ideology of the ruling class, yet, unlike Marx, their analysis is primarily <i>sociological</i>, not political. Their concern is not only to locate the false thinking of rulers but to show that <i>all</i> thinking (including Marxism) is open to error and that <i>all</i> thinking is necessarily dependent upon a social a priori, which may or may not lead to false thinking. As Werner Stark says: “We see the broad and deep acres of history through a mental grid…through a system of values which is established in our minds <i>before</i> we look out on to it—and it is this grid which decides…what will fall into our field of perception.” Stark illustrates this point by showing how the differences in British and German philosophies are partly traceable to “the great difference of socio-political development in the two countries.” While “British philosophy has been predominantly realistic, sober and down-to-earth,” “German philosophy has been predominantly…metaphysical and divorced from reality.” One important reason for these contrasting <a id="page_41"/>approaches is traceable to the appearance of a working democracy early in Britain's history and Germany's tendency to remain “a country of authoritarianism.”<sup><a href="notes.xhtml#ch03-fnr19" id="ch03-fn19">19</a></sup> Of course, Stark points out that such an observation is not all that needs to be said for a comprehensive understanding of the factors responsible for the distinctive characteristics of German and British philosophies; but a careful scrutiny of their sociopolitical histories does illuminate the function of a mental grid as the prerequisite for thinking.</p>
<p class="indent">Despite the important differences between their respective disciplines, theologians can learn much from the sociologists of knowledge. The latter, in addition to freshening up Feuerbach's contention that religion is a human projection and going deeper than Marx on the problem of ideology, also demonstrates convincingly the function of a social a priori in all thinking and thus refutes decisively the naïve assumption of many theologians who claim that God-ideas are objective and universal. Theologians must face the relativity of their thought processes: their ideas about God are the reflections of social conditioning; their dreams and visions are derived from this world. For those who are accustomed to speaking <i>ex cathedra</i> on matters of faith, this will be a difficult pill to swallow. I do not have the Pope primarily in mind, though he is certainly included. The domestic academic scene affords scores of cases. After Mannheim, Stark, and Berger, whatever may be their differences among themselves or our differences with them, the assumption that theological thinking is objective or universal is ridiculous.</p>
<p class="indent">Of course black theologians do not escape the truth of the sociology of knowledge. The difference between Black Theology and white theology does not lie in the absence of a social a priori in the former. Like white theologians, black theologians do theology out of the social matrix of their existence. The dissimilarity between Black Theology and white theology lies at the point of each having different mental grids which account for their different approaches to the gospel. While I believe that the social a priori of Black Theology is closer to the axiological perspective of biblical revelation,<sup><a href="notes.xhtml#ch03-fnr20" id="ch03-fn20">20</a></sup> for the moment the point is simply the inescapable interplay between theology and society—whether white or Black Theology. This means that theology is political language. What people think about God, Jesus Christ, and the Church cannot be separated from their own social and political status in a given society.</p>
<a id="page_42"/>
<p class="head" id="sub2"><b>WHITE AMERICAN THEOLOGY</b></p>
<p class="indent1">The dialectic of theology and social existence is particularly obvious in its white American branch when that theology is related to the people of African descent on the American continent. While some white theologians in the twentieth century have emphasized the relativity of faith in history, they have seldom applied this insight to the problem of the color line.<sup><a href="notes.xhtml#ch03-fnr21" id="ch03-fn21">21</a></sup> Because the conceptual framework of their consciousness has been shaped already by white sociopolitical interests, their exposition of the problem of faith and history is limited to defending the intellectual status of religious assertions against erosion by historical criticism. Even a casual look at the contemporary discussion of the problem of faith in the context of the historical-critical method reveals that such problems are unique to oppressors as they seek to reconcile traditional theology with modern scientific thinking about history.</p>
<p class="indent">It is not that the problem of faith and history is unimportant. Rather, its importance, as defined by white theologians, is limited to their social interests. Although oppressed blacks are interested in faith as they struggle in history, the shape of the faith-history problem in contemporary U.S. theology did not arise from the social existence of black people. On the contrary, its character was shaped by those who, sharing the consciousness of the Enlightenment, failed to question the consequences of the so-called enlightened view as reflected in the colonization and slavery of that period.</p>
<p class="indent">Perhaps it is true to say, as does Van Harvey, that the Enlightenment created a “revolution in the consciousness of Western man”;<sup><a href="notes.xhtml#ch03-fnr22" id="ch03-fn22">22</a></sup> but not all people are Western and not all people in the West experienced the Enlightenment in the same way. For black and red peoples in North America, the spirit of the Enlightenment was socially and politically demonic, becoming a pseudo-intellectual basis for their enslavement or extermination.</p>
<p class="indent">Through an examination of the contemporary white theological scene, it is clear that the children of the Enlightenment have simply accepted the issues passed on by their grandparents. Although the historical events of the twentieth century have virtually destroyed the nineteenth-century confidence in the goodness of humanity and the inevitable progress of history, twentieth-century white theologians <a id="page_43"/>are still secure in their assumption that important theological issues emerge, primarily if not exclusively, out of the white experience. Despite the sit-ins and pray-ins, the civil rights movement and black power, Martin Luther King and Stokely Carmichael, white theologians still continue their business as usual. These theologians fail to realize that such a procedure is just as racist and oppressive against black people as Billy Graham's White House sermons. This is so because the black judgment on this matter is that those who are not for us must be against us.</p>
<p class="indent">In this connection, one is reminded of an observation by Karl Marx: “Philosophy [and we could add theology] and the study of the actual world have the same relation to one another as masturbation and sexual love.”<sup><a href="notes.xhtml#ch03-fnr23" id="ch03-fn23">23</a></sup> Since most professional theologians are the descendants of the advantaged class and thus often represent the consciousness of the class, it is difficult not to conclude that their theologies are in fact a bourgeois exercise in intellectual masturbation. Certainly, if one takes seriously the exploitation and suffering of black people in America and Jesus’ proclamation that he came “to set at liberty those who are oppressed” (Luke 4:18 <small>RSV</small>), then the absence of the urgency of the gospel of black liberation in modern and contemporary American theology can only confirm Marx's contention that “your very ideas are but the outgrowth of the conditions of your bourgeois production and bourgeois property…. [For] the ruling ideas of each age have ever been the ideas of its ruling class.”<sup><a href="notes.xhtml#ch03-fnr24" id="ch03-fn24">24</a></sup></p>
<p class="indent">Unfortunately, American theologians from Cotton Mather and Jonathan Edwards to Reinhold Niebuhr and Schubert Ogden, including radicals and conservatives, have interpreted the gospel according to the cultural and political interests of white people. They have rarely attempted to transcend the social interests of their group by seeking an analysis of the gospel in the light of the consciousness of black people struggling for liberation. White theologians, because of their identity with the dominant power structure, are largely boxed within their own cultural history.</p>
<p class="indent">During slavery the social limitation of white theology was expressed in three main forms: (1) some white theologians ignored slavery as a theological issue; (2) others justified it; and (3) only a few spoke out against it.</p>
<p class="indent">First, it was not uncommon for Anglicans, Presbyterians, Congregationalists, Baptists, Methodists, and other assorted denominational <a id="page_44"/>theologians to do theology as if slavery did not exist. For example, Jonathan Edwards, often called America's most outstanding theologian, could preach and write theological treatises on total depravity, unconditional election, limited atonement, irresistible grace, and the perseverance of the saints without the slightest hint of how these issues related to human bondage. He simply defined the gospel in the light of his Calvinistic heritage; and with unusual conceptual skills derived from the Enlightenment, he defended the Reformed faith. If pressed, he perhaps would have expressed his sentiments for the cause of freedom. But what is crucial is that his understanding of the theological task did not consciously or directly involve the political issue of slavery. Many of his contemporaries followed his example.</p>
<p class="indent">The second group of theologians represents those who defended the slave institution on theological grounds. Cotton Mather was one of its early spokesmen. He urged white people to teach their slaves “that it is <small>GOD</small> who has caused them to be <i>Servants</i>, and that they serve <small>JESUS CHRIST</small>, while they are at Work for their <i>Masters</i>.” Since Mather owned slaves, it is obvious that that fact alone would influence his theological observations. But he was not unique. Other highly visible spokesmen for “God” defended slavery, including George Whitefield and Thomas Bacon.<sup><a href="notes.xhtml#ch03-fnr25" id="ch03-fn25">25</a></sup></p>
<p class="indent">The influence of social realities on theological reflections was particularly obvious in the Methodist and Baptist churches’ reaction to the issue of slavery during the late eighteenth and early nineteenth centuries. Immediately following the Revolutionary War, both churches, responding to the ethos of freedom, took radical positions against slavery. In 1780 at the Baltimore Conference, the Methodists condemned slavery as “contrary to the laws of God, man, and nature, and hurtful to society.”<sup><a href="notes.xhtml#ch03-fnr26" id="ch03-fn26">26</a></sup> And four years later, at the Christmas Conference of 1784, they strengthened their position. They “voted to expel all slaveholding members of Methodist societies…who would not, within twelve months after due notification, perfect a legal document to manumit all their slaves when they reached certain specific ages. The conference also voted to expel immediately all Methodists who bought (except for the purpose of liberation) or sold slaves.”<sup><a href="notes.xhtml#ch03-fnr27" id="ch03-fn27">27</a></sup> Many Baptists took similar action throughout the South.</p>
<p class="indent">But by the beginning of the nineteenth century, when cotton became king, the churches allowed the change in social reality to <a id="page_45"/>influence a change in their religious views. The Methodists not only suspended their 1784 rules within six months but in 1816 a General Conference committee reported:</p>
<p class="block">The committee…are of opinion that, under the present existing circumstances in relation to slavery, little can be done to abolish a practice so contrary to the principles of moral justice. They are sorry to say that the evil appears to be past remedy…. Your committee find that in the South and West the civil authorities render emancipation impracticable, and…they are constrained to admit that to bring about such a change in the civil code as would favour the cause of liberty is not in the power of the General Conference.<sup><a href="notes.xhtml#ch03-fnr28" id="ch03-fn28">28</a></sup></p>
<p class="body-text1">Other churches made similar compromising statements, creating not only a place for slaveholders in the churches but providing a context for the adamant defenders of the peculiar institution. Indeed, as late as 1900, Charles Carroll wrote a book entitled <i>The Negro a Beast</i>. Although many clergymen condemned it, the attitude of the churches on slavery in particular and black people generally prepared the way for its appearance.</p>
<p class="indent">The third group of theologians were those who openly condemned slavery. Persons in this group included John Woolman, Leonard Bacon, William Ellery Channing, and Theodore Weld. The latter achieved national prominence for his fight against slavery. He published his views in two works, <i>The Bible against Slavery</i> (1837) and <i>American Slavery as It Is: Testimony of a Thousand Witnesses</i> (1839). Weld and other white abolitionists should be commended for their courage in taking a stand against the cultural and theological ethos of their time. They are concrete examples that social existence is not mechanical and deterministic. The gospel grants people the freedom to transcend their cultural history and to affirm a dimension of universality common to all peoples.</p>
<p class="indent">However, even Weld and most white abolitionists were partly limited by their cultural history, still viewing humanity from a white perspective, usually as defined by the Enlightenment.<sup><a href="notes.xhtml#ch03-fnr29" id="ch03-fn29">29</a></sup> They almost never used the resources of black culture as an approach to the problem of slavery but simply assumed that black freedom would result from the end of legal servitude. This may explain why “the <a id="page_46"/>constitution of the American Anti-Slavery Society failed to mention social equality as an objective” and why its members considered its work completed after the Civil War.<sup><a href="notes.xhtml#ch03-fnr30" id="ch03-fn30">30</a></sup></p>
<p class="indent">The attitudes of these three groups are still with us today. The second group is primarily represented in conservative churches and seminaries of the South. It is most dramatically symbolized in Billy Graham and Norman Vincent Peale. Of course, their view of the gospel is not arrived at through an open encounter with the biblical message, but is exclusively determined by the continued social and political dominance of whites over blacks. They are the best examples that religious conservatism and white racism are often two sides of the same reality.</p>
<p class="indent">Theological representatives in the third group are quite rare in contemporary theology. To my knowledge, only one white theologian, Frederick Herzog in <i>Liberation Theology</i>, has attempted to reorder theological priorities in the light of the oppression of black people. Others like Paul Lehmann, Richard Schaull, and Carl Braaten have been defining the theological task according to “the politics of God,” relating theology to the struggle of liberation throughout the world.<sup><a href="notes.xhtml#ch03-fnr31" id="ch03-fn31">31</a></sup> The difference between Herzog's way of doing theology and that of the persons just named is the manner in which the former calls into question typical theological options. He not only takes the oppressed and their liberation as his theological point of departure, but he also rejects the process theologies of John Cobb and Schubert Ogden because he does not see how abstract arguments about God relate to the marginal people of the land.<sup><a href="notes.xhtml#ch03-fnr32" id="ch03-fn32">32</a></sup> What difference does it make if one should “prove” a philosophical point, if that point has nothing to do with spreading freedom throughout the land? Whatever else may be said about Herzog's <i>Liberation Theology</i>, it is concrete evidence that white theologians do not have to remain enclosed in their little white boxes.</p>
<p class="indent">Nevertheless most white theologians who attend learned societies and write books and articles on theology fall in the first group. These theologians believe in rigorous scholarship and disciplined scientific thinking, but this process invariably fails to grapple with the problem of color. They conveniently play down the fact that their very definition of theology is culturally bound and thus belies their claims about universality. Indeed, if we take seriously H. Richard Niebuhr's observation that “theological opinions have their roots in the relationship of the religious life to the cultural and political conditions prevailing <a id="page_47"/>in any group of Christians,”<sup><a href="notes.xhtml#ch03-fnr33" id="ch03-fn33">33</a></sup> then it is perhaps correct to conclude that the various white theological perspectives which ignore color are nothing but white cultural projections.</p>
<p class="indent">Consider the definitions of theology by Harold De Wolf and Paul Tillich. The former says: “Systematic Theology is the critical discipline devoted to discovering, expounding and defending the more important truths implied in the experience of the Christian community.”<sup><a href="notes.xhtml#ch03-fnr34" id="ch03-fn34">34</a></sup> The latter says: “Theology, as a function of the Christian Church, must serve the needs of the Church. A theological system is supposed to satisfy two basic needs: the statement of the truth of the Christian message and the interpretation of this truth for every new generation.”<sup><a href="notes.xhtml#ch03-fnr35" id="ch03-fn35">35</a></sup> Despite my affinity with the existential orientation of Tillich against DeWolf's rationalism, there is a conspicuous cultural similarity in them. Neither one defines theology as a discipline which speaks for and about the liberation of the oppressed from <i>political</i> bondage. May we conclude that this is just a careless oversight and that, like Jonathan Edwards, they would take their stand with the oppressed? Certainly, this is the case, as Tillich's early theological treatises and DeWolf's stand on civil rights demonstrate. It is not my intention to question the integrity of their personal ethics. My concern is with the identity of Christian theology and the influence of culture on a theologian's understanding of the theological task. Because DeWolf and Tillich were not politically threatened in America, they did not include politics in their theological point of departure. In accepting the axiological system of American culture, they were prevented from regarding the political suffering of black people as critical evidence for the shaping of their theological perspectives. I would also contend that they missed the decisive ingredient of the gospel message. For if the essence of the gospel <i>is</i> the liberation of the oppressed from sociopolitical humiliation for a new freedom in Christ Jesus (and I do not see how anyone can read the Scriptures and conclude otherwise), and if Christian theology is an explication of the meaning of that gospel for our time, must not theology itself have liberation as its starting point or run the risk of being at best idle talk and at worst blasphemy?</p>
<p class="indent">The same conclusion can be drawn from most other contemporary theologians. Because white theologians live in a society that is racist, the oppression of black people does not occupy an important item on their theological agenda. Again as Karl Marx put it: “It is not <a id="page_48"/>consciousness that determines life, but life that determines consciousness.”<sup><a href="notes.xhtml#ch03-fnr36" id="ch03-fn36">36</a></sup> Because white theologians are well fed and speak for a people who control the means of production, the problem of hunger is not a theological issue for them. That is why they spend more time debating the relation between the Jesus of history and the Christ of faith than probing the depths of Jesus’ command to feed the poor. It is theologically much more comfortable to write essays and books about the authenticity or non-authenticity of this or that word of Jesus than it is to hear his Word of liberation, calling the humiliated into existence for freedom. To hear Jesus’ Word of liberation requires a radical decision, not just about my self-understanding (although that is definitely included, as Rudolf Bultmann clearly demonstrated) but about <i>practice</i>, a decision that defines theology as a weapon in the struggle of the little ones for liberation.</p>
<p class="indent">The history of white American theology illustrates the concept of the <i>social a priori</i> asserted by Werner Stark and the other sociologists of knowledge whom we discussed earlier. The social environment functions as a “mental grid,” deciding what will be considered as relevant data in a given inquiry. For example, because white theologians are not the sons and daughters of black slaves but the descendants of white slave masters, their theological grid automatically excludes from the field of perception the data of Richard Allen, Henry H. Garnet, Nathaniel Paul, David Walker, and Henry M. Turner. This same axiological grid accounts for the absence of the apocalyptic expectations of the spirituals among the so-called “hope theologians”; and the same explanation can be given why the white existentialists do not say anything about absurdity in the blues. Why would we even expect them to say something, since their value system is the reason why so many blacks had to sing</p>
<p class="para1">Sometimes I feel like nothin’, somethin’ th'owed away,</p>
<p class="para">Then I get my guitar and play the blues all day.</p>
<p class="para1">Great gawamighty, folks feelin’ bad,</p>
<p class="para">Lost everything they ever had.</p>
<p class="indent1">The mental grid influences not only what books theologians read when doing their research, but also which aspects of personal experience will shape theological style and methodology. Again it is <a id="page_49"/>obvious that because white theologians were not enslaved and lynched and are not ghettoized because of color, they do not think that color is an important point of departure for theological discourse. Color is not <i>universal</i> they say, moving on to what they regard as the more important problems of theological scholarship. Universalism is a social product and it remains such even (especially!) when it is legitimated in pious or scholarly language. The only way people can enhance their vision of the universal is to break out of their cultural and political boxes and encounter another reality. They must be challenged to take seriously another value system. That is, instead of studying only Jonathan Edwards, they must also examine the reality of David Walker. Here truth is expanded beyond the limitations of white culture.</p>
<p class="head" id="sub3"><b>BLACK RELIGIOUS THOUGHT</b></p>
<p class="indent1">Like white American theology, black thought on Christianity has been influenced by its social context. But unlike white theologians, who spoke to and for the culture of the ruling class, black people's religious ideas were shaped by the cultural and political existence of the victims in North America. Unlike Europeans who immigrated to this land to escape from tyranny, Africans came in chains to serve a nation of tyrants. It was the slave experience that shaped our idea of this land. And this difference in social existence between Europeans and Africans must be recognized, if we are to understand correctly the contrast in the form and content of black and white theology.</p>
<p class="indent">What then is the form and content of black religious thought when viewed in the light of black people's social situation? Briefly, <i>the form of black religious thought is expressed in the style of story and its content is liberation</i>. Black Theology, then, is the story of black people's struggle for liberation in an extreme situation of oppression. Consequently there is no sharp distinction between thought and practice, worship and theology, because black theological reflections about God occurred in the black struggle of freedom.</p>
<p class="indent">White theologians built logical systems; black folks told tales. Whites debated the validity of infant baptism or the issue of predestination and free will; blacks recited biblical stories about God leading the Israelites from Egyptian bondage, Joshua and the battle of Jericho, and the Hebrew children in the fiery furnace. White theologians argued about the general status of religious assertions in <a id="page_50"/>view of the development of science generally and Darwin's <i>Origin of Species</i> in particular; blacks were more concerned about their status in American society and its relation to the biblical claim that Jesus came to set the captives free. White thought on the Christian view of salvation was largely “spiritual” and sometimes “rational,” but usually separated from the concrete struggle of freedom in this world. Black thought was largely eschatological and never abstract, but usually related to blacks’ struggle against earthly oppression.</p>
<p class="indent">The difference in the form of black and white religious thought is, on the one hand, <i>sociological</i>. Since blacks were slaves and had to work from sun-up to nightfall, they did not have time for the art of philosophical and theological discourse. They, therefore, did not know about the systems of Augustine, Calvin, or Edwards. And if Ernst Bloch is correct in his contention that “need is the mother of thought,”<sup><a href="notes.xhtml#ch03-fnr37" id="ch03-fn37">37</a></sup> then it can be said that black slaves did not <i>need</i> to know about Anselm's ontological argument, Descartes's <i>Cogito, ergo sum</i>, and Kant's <i>Ding an sich</i>. Such were not their philosophical and theological problems as defined by their social reality. Blacks did not ask whether God existed or whether divine existence could be rationally demonstrated. Divine existence was taken for granted, because God was the point of departure of their faith. The divine question which they addressed was whether or not God was with them in their struggle for liberation. Neither did blacks ask about the general status of their personal existence or that of the physical world. The brutal presence of white people did not allow that sort of philosophical skepticism to enter their consciousness. Therefore the classical philosophical debate about the priority of concepts versus things, which motivated Kant and his predecessors’ reflective endeavors, did not interest black people. What was “real” was the presence of oppression and the historical need to strive against it. They intuitively perceived that the problem of the auction block and slave drivers would not be solved through philosophical debate. The problem had to be handled at the level of concrete history as that history was defined by the presence of the slave masters. Slaves therefore had to devise a language commensurate with their social situation. That was why they told stories. Through the medium of stories, black slaves created concrete and vivid pictures of their past and present existence, using the historical images of God's dealings with people and thus breaking open a future for the oppressed not known to ordinary historical observation.</p>
<a id="page_51"/>
<p class="indent">The difference between black and white thought is also <i>theological</i>. Black people did not devise various philosophical arguments for God's existence, because the God of black experience was not a metaphysical idea. God was the God of history, the Liberator of the oppressed from bondage. Jesus was not an abstract Word of God, but God's Word made flesh who came to set the prisoner free. He was the “Lamb of God” that was born in Bethlehem and was slain on Golgotha's hill. He was also “the Risen Lord” and “the King of Kings.” He was their Alpha and Omega, the One who had come to make the first last and the last first.</p>
<p class="indent">While white preachers and theologians often defined Jesus Christ as a spiritual Savior, the deliverer of people from sin and guilt, black preachers were unquestionably historical. They viewed God as the Liberator in history. That was why the black Church was involved in the abolitionist movement in the nineteenth century and the civil rights movement in the twentieth. Black preachers reasoned that if God delivered Israel from Pharaoh's army and Daniel from the lion's den, then God will deliver black people from American slavery and oppression. So the content of their thought was liberation and they communicated that message through preaching, singing, and praying, telling their story of how “we shall overcome.”</p>
<p class="indent">Consider the song about that “Old Ship of Zion” and how “she had landed many a thousand,…and will land as many a more. O glory, Hallelu!” They say “she is loaded down with angels,” and “King Jesus is the Captain.” The presence of Jesus as the Captain was black people's assurance that the ship would “carry [them] all home.” The “Old Ship of Zion” was a symbol that their life had meaning despite the condition of servitude. It was their guarantee that their future was in the hands of the One who died on Calvary. That was why they proclaimed: “Glory hallelujah!” It was an affirmation of faith that black slaves would triumph over life's contradictions, because they had met the Captain of that “Old Ship of Zion” and were already on board.</p>
<p class="indent">At other times, the salvation story was described as “the gospel train.” Blacks described this reality with eschatological and future expectation: “The gospel train is coming.” And they also saw it as already realized in their present: “I hear it just at land” and “the car wheels moving and rumbling thro’ the land.” One can “hear the bell and the whistle” and its “coming round the curve.” Of course, this is not a normal train, not one created by white society. This is an <a id="page_52"/>eschatological train, the train of salvation and it will carry the oppressed to glory. If you miss this train “you're left behind.” That partly accounts for the urgency of the call to</p>
<p class="para1">Get on board, Children,</p>
<p class="para">Get on board, Children,</p>
<p class="para">Get on board, Children,</p>
<p class="para">There's room for many a more.</p>
<p class="body-text1">There is no excuse for not making the existential decision to “Get on board” because</p>
<p class="para1">The fare is cheap and all can go,</p>
<p class="para2">The rich and the poor are there</p>
<p class="para">No second-class on board the train,</p>
<p class="para2">No difference in the fare.</p>
<p class="indent1">Salvation was not only a train and a ship but also a sweet chariot, swinging low, “coming for to carry me home.” It was that “Old time religion” that brought the slaves out of bondage, and “good when you're in trouble.” It's that “rock in a weary land” and the “shelter in the time of storm.” It was the divine presence in their situation that held their humanity together in the midst of the brokenness of black existence. It was the power to endure in struggle and the patience to remain calm when surrounded by inexplicable evil. That was why black people sang, “Been down in the valley so long, and I ain't got weary yet.” They did not give up in despair during slavery and subsequent oppression, because of the presence of the One who controls life and who can overcome its contradictions. This is the theme of black religion, and it was expressed in concrete images derived from their social situation.</p>
<p class="indent">The relation between the form and the content of black thought was dialectical. The story was both the medium through which truth was communicated and also a constituent of truth itself. In the telling of a truthful story, the reality of liberation to which the story pointed was also revealed in the actual <i>telling</i> of the story itself. That was why an equal, and often greater, emphasis was placed on the storyteller.</p>
<p class="indent">In black churches, the one who preaches the Word is primarily a storyteller. And thus when the black church community invites a <a id="page_53"/>minister as pastor, their chief question is: “Can the Reverend tell the story?” This question refers both to the theme of black religion and also to the act of storytelling itself. It refers to a person's ability to recite God's historical dealings with God's people from Abraham to Jesus, from St. Paul to John on the island of Patmos, and to the preacher's ability to relate these biblical stories to contemporary black stories. The past and present are joined dialectically, creating a black vision of the future.</p>
<p class="indent">Black churches usually do not emphasize academic degrees as a criterion for preaching, because they do not associate a learned discourse with storytelling. Indeed many blacks are suspicious of “intellectuals” in the pulpit, because of their identification of that term with white people. Black church people contend that one needs more than “book-learning” in order to tell God's story. One needs to be <i>converted</i> to the faith and <i>called</i> to the ministry of Jesus Christ. When these two events happen, then one is ready to be used by God as the instrument of his story, of his dealings with his people.</p>
<p class="indent">In the black Church, little emphasis is placed on the modern distinction between liberals and fundamentalists as found in white churches. Blacks show little concern about the abstract status of the Bible, whether fallible or infallible. Their concern is with the Scripture as a living reality in the concreteness of their existence. Since the biblical story of God's dealings with people can be told in various ways, the chief concern of the people is not the information included in the preacher's message but, rather, <i>how</i> the preacher arranges that information into a story and relates it all to the daily lives of the people. The preacher may begin with Adam and Eve in the Garden of Eden or with John on the island of Patmos. The concern is not <i>where</i> the preacher begins because the people already know the various scenes in God's drama with God's people. They are concerned with how the preacher takes the bare facts of God's story and weaves them into the structure of their lives, giving a unique touch as a storyteller.</p>
<p class="indent">Consider the sermon “Behold the Rib!” The preacher begins by emphasizing the power of God. This is a “High-riding and strong armed God” who “walk[s] acrost his globe creation…wid de blue elements for a helmet,…and a wall of fire round his feet.” “He wakes the sun every morning from its fiery bed wid de breath of his smile and commands de moon wid his eyes.” Then the preacher moves to the essence of the story as suggested by the subject:</p>
<a id="page_54"/>
<p class="para1">So God put Adam into a deep sleep</p>
<p class="para">And took out a bone, ah hah!</p>
<p class="para">And it is said that it was a rib.</p>
<p class="para">Behold de rib!</p>
<p class="para">A bone out of man's side.</p>
<p class="para">He put de man to sleep and made wo-man,</p>
<p class="para">And men and women been sleeping together ever since.</p>
<p class="para">Behold the rib!</p>
<p class="para">Brothers, if God</p>
<p class="para">Had taken dat bone out of man's head</p>
<p class="para">He would have meant for woman to rule, hah</p>
<p class="para">If he had taken a bone out of his foot,</p>
<p class="para">He would have meant for us to dominize and rule.</p>
<p class="para">He could have made her out of back-bone</p>
<p class="para">And then she would have been behind us.</p>
<p class="para">But, no, God Almighty, he took de bone out of his side</p>
<p class="para">So dat places de woman beside us;</p>
<p class="para">Hah! God knowed his own mind.</p>
<p class="para">Behold the rib!<sup><a href="notes.xhtml#ch03-fnr38" id="ch03-fn38">38</a></sup></p>
<p class="body-text1">This sermon stresses not only the power of God but the equality of man and woman in God's creation. The rib rather than symbolizing the woman's inferiority actually stands for equal status, the right to be fully human. That is why the preacher placed so much emphasis on the phrase “Behold de rib!” The rib is not a “foot-bone” or a “back-bone,” both of which represent inferiority. It is a “side-bone,” thereby making woman equal to man.</p>
<p class="indent">Sometimes it was difficult to understand the exact verbal point the black preacher was making. But because the power of the story was embedded in the <i>act</i> of telling itself, it did not always matter. One could hear the message in the passion and mood which was created by the rising and falling of the voice as the preacher moved in bodily rhythm across the pulpit and in the aisle, describing rapidly the different scenes of God's salvation drama. The message was in the feeling of the Spirit that moved “from heart to heart and from breast to breast” throughout the congregation as the preacher hummed and moaned the story. The truth of the story was dependent upon whether the people received that extra strength to go one more mile in their struggle to survive and whether they received the courage to strive <a id="page_55"/>one more time to right the wrongs in this world. The message was the passion for affirming the truth of their lives, a truth not recognized in the white world. And this “knowledge” was received every time the biblical story was preached as it was meant to be. That was why the people inquired of every minister: “Can the Reverend tell the story?</p>
<p class="indent">The theme of liberation expressed in story form is the essence of black religion. Both content and form were essentially determined by black people's social existence. Because black people were oppressed but not destroyed by it, they intuitively knew that servitude was a denial of their essential worth. They therefore looked for religious and secular themes in their social existence that promised release from the pain of slavery and oppression. It was not simply through an exegetical study of the Bible that blacks decided to center their preaching on the Exodus and not on Paul's letter to Philemon; neither was it through exegesis that they centered their spirituals on the cross and resurrection of Jesus and not on his birth in Bethlehem. In view of their social situation of oppression, black people needed liberating visions so that they would not let historical limitations determine their perception of black being. Therefore when Christianity was taught to them and they began to read the Bible, blacks simply appropriated those biblical stories that met their historical need. That was why some themes are stressed and others are overlooked. The one theme that stood out above all other themes was <i>liberation</i>, and that was because of the social conditions of slavery. Such traditional Calvinistic problems as unconditional election and limited atonement did not occur to them. They did not debate religion on an abstract theological level but lived their religion concretely in history.</p>
<p class="indent">Like the theme of liberation, the form of black religion in story was chosen for similar sociological reasons. The easiest way for the oppressed to defy conceptual definitions that justify their existence in servitude is to tell stories about another reality where they are accepted as human beings. Story is not only easy to understand and to remember; it is often deceptive to those who stand outside the community where it was created. This is the meaning behind the black comment:</p>
<p class="block">The white man is always trying to know into somebody else's business. All right, I'll set something outside the door of my mind for him to play with and handle. He can read my writing <a id="page_56"/>but he sho’ cain't read my mind. I'll put this play toy in his hand, and he will seize it and go away. Then I'll say my say and sing my song.<sup><a href="notes.xhtml#ch03-fnr39" id="ch03-fn39">39</a></sup></p>
<p class="body-text1">What white slave masters would have recognized that the tales of Br'er Rabbit and his triumphs over the stronger animals actually expressed black slaves’ conscious hopes and dreams of overcoming the slave masters themselves? Who among the white community would have perceived that in the singing and preaching about “crossing the river Jordan and entering the New Jerusalem” black slaves were sometimes talking about Canada, Africa, and America north of the Mason-Dixon line? White slave masters were no brighter than our contemporary white theologians who can see in black religion only what their axiological presuppositions permit them to see. And that vision usually extends no further than some notion of black “other-worldliness” leading to passivity. But there is something much deeper than that simplistic idea in black religion. Nat Turner's spirit is buried beneath the shouts and the cries. And that spirit will soon rise and claim the eschatological future promised in God's encounter with the community.</p>
<p class="indent">It is difficult to express this liberating truth in rational discourse alone; it must be told in story. And when this truth is told as it was meant to be, the oppressed are transformed, taken into another world and given a glimpse of the promised land. And when they leave the church, they often say to one another what the disciples said after having experienced the Risen Lord: “Did not our hearts burn within while he talked to us on the road, while he opened to us the scriptures?” (Luke 24:32).</p>
</div>
</body>
</html>