<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>chapter10</title>
<link href="ebook_style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
<meta content="urn:uuid:5bf1d25e-4978-4604-b0f7-22d24fac0880" name="Adept.expected.resource"/>
</head>
<body>
<div>
<a id="page_207"/>
<h2 class="chap_tit"><span class="underline">CHAPTER 10</span></h2>
<p class="chapz"><b>Liberation and Reconciliation</b></p>
<p class="indent">When black people emphasize their right to defend themselves against those who seek to destroy the black community, it never fails that so-called white Christians then ask, “What about the biblical doctrine of reconciliation?” “What about Christian forgiveness?” “Can't black people find it in their hearts to forgive us?” White people who ask these questions should not be surprised if blacks turn and walk away in disgust. The difficulty is not with the reconciliation-forgiveness question itself but with the people asking it. Like the question of violence, this question is almost always addressed <i>to</i> blacks <i>by</i> whites, as if we blacks are responsible for the demarcation of community on the basis of color. They who are responsible for the dividing walls of hostility, racism, and hatred want to know whether the victims are ready to forgive and forget—without changing the balance of power. They want to know whether we have any hard feelings toward them, whether we still love them, even though we are oppressed and brutalized by them. What are we to say to a people who insist on oppressing us but get upset when we reject them?</p>
<p class="indent">Because black liberation is the point of departure of my analysis of the gospel of Jesus, I cannot accept a view of reconciliation based on white values. The Christian view of reconciliation has nothing to do with black people being nice to white people as if the gospel demands that we ignore their insults and their humiliating presence. It does not mean discussing with whites what it means to be black or going to white gatherings and displaying what whites call an understanding attitude—remaining cool and calm amid racists and bigots.</p>
<p class="indent">To understand the biblical view of reconciliation, we must see it in relation to the struggle of freedom in an oppressed society. In America, <a id="page_208"/>that means seeing reconciliation in the social context of black liberation. As black theologians who have lived in the social context of racial oppression, we must not be afraid to ask the hard questions. In a society dominated by white people, what does Paul mean when he says that Christ is “our peace, who has made us…one, and has broken down the dividing wall of hostility,” reconciling us to God “in one body through the cross, thereby bringing the hostility to an end” (Eph. 2:14–15 <small>RSV</small>)? Are we to conclude that the hostility between blacks and whites has been brought to an end? If so, I wish somebody would tell white folks in America and elsewhere in the world, because they sure don't act like it. If blacks and whites have been reconciled, how come white racists are still oppressing blacks in South Africa, Rhodesia (now Zimbabwe), and elsewhere on that continent? How come white racists are still being elected to public office in the United States, thereby continuing their dehumanization of black people in the name of God and country? How come white churches still support racial oppression either through silence or through their public defense of the order of injustice? How can we black people take seriously the unity in Christ Jesus when there is no unity in politics or religion?</p>
<p class="indent">These are the questions that must inform a black theological analysis of reconciliation, and they cannot be answered by spiritualizing Christ's emphasis on love, as if his love is indifferent to social and political justice. We black theologians must refuse to accept a view of reconciliation that pretends that slavery never existed, that we were not lynched and shot, and that we are not <i>presently</i> being cut to the core of our physical and mental endurance. But with the words of Melvin Tolson, I ask rhetorically:</p>
<p class="para1">Oh, how can we forget</p>
<p class="para">Our human rights denied?</p>
<p class="para">Oh, how can we forget</p>
<p class="para">Our manhood crucified?</p>
<p class="para">When Justice is profaned</p>
<p class="para">And plea with curse is met,</p>
<p class="para">When Freedom's gates are barred,</p>
<p class="para">Oh, how can we forget?<sup><a href="notes.xhtml#ch10-fnr1" id="ch10-fn1">1</a></sup></p>
<p class="body-text1">The truth of the matter is that we dare not forget, for the only limit to our oppression is our power against it. In this final chapter, my <a id="page_209"/>purpose is to evaluate the Christian doctrine of reconciliation in the light of black people's unwillingness to forget the pains of their existence, and to relate it to biblical history.</p>
<p class="head" id="sub1"><b>THE OBJECTIVE REALITY OF RECONCILIATION</b></p>
<p class="indent1">According to the Bible, reconciliation is primarily an act of God. “God was in Christ reconciling the world to himself,” says Paul in II Corinthians 5:19 (<small>RSV</small>). And in Ephesians 1:10, emphasizing a similar point, he concludes that God has sent Jesus Christ “to unite all things in him, things in heaven and things on earth” (<small>RSV</small>). In both passages, Paul stresses the objective reality of reconciliation, grounded in God's initiative and affecting the entire cosmos. Reconciliation is not a human quality or potentiality, although it affects human relationships. It is a divine action that embraces the whole world, changing our relationship with God and making us new creatures. Formerly we were slaves; but reconciliation means that we are free. Formerly we were separated from God, alienated from God's will and enslaved to the evils of this world. Now we are reconciled; fellowship with God is now possible, because Christ through his death and resurrection has liberated us from the principalities and powers and the rulers of this present world. Formerly our knowledge of our identity was defined by those who had power over life and death in this world. Now God has redeemed and reconciled us, so that we know that true life is found only in him who conquered death on the cross and was resurrected on the third day.</p>
<p class="indent">In the Bible the objective reality of reconciliation is connected with divine liberation. This means that human fellowship with God is made possible through God's activity in history, setting people free from economic, social, and political bondage. God's act of reconciliation is not mystical communion with the divine; nor is it a pietistic state of inwardness bestowed upon the believer. God's reconciliation is a new relationship with <i>people</i> created by God's concrete involvement in the political affairs of the world, taking sides with the weak and the helpless. Israel, reflecting on its covenant relationship initiated by divine action, summed up its meaning in a liturgical confession:</p>
<p class="block">My father was a homeless Aramaean who went down to Egypt with a small company and lived there until they became a great, powerful and numerous nation. But the Egyptians ill-treated us, <a id="page_210"/>humiliated us and imposed cruel slavery upon us. Then we cried to the Lord the God of our fathers for help, and he listened to us and saw our humiliation, our hardship and distress; and so the Lord brought us out of Egypt with a strong hand and outstretched arm, with terrifying deeds, and with signs and portents. He brought us to this place and gave us this land, a land flowing with milk and honey. (Deuteronomy 26:5–10 <small>NEB</small>)</p>
<p class="indent1">The point is clear: Israel's covenant relationship with God is made possible because of God's liberating activity. Israel is Yahweh's people, and Yahweh is their God because, and only because, Yahweh has delivered them from the bondage of political slavery and brought them through the wilderness to the land of Canaan. There could have been no covenant at Sinai without the Exodus from Egypt, no reconciliation without liberation. Liberation is what God does to effect reconciliation, and without the former the latter is impossible. To be liberated is to be delivered from the state of unfreedom to freedom; it is to have the chains struck off the body and mind so that the creature of God can be who he or she is. Reconciliation is that bestowal of freedom and life with God which takes place on the basis of God's liberating deeds. Liberation and reconciliation are tied together and have meaning only through God's initiative. They tell us that humans cannot be human, and God refuses to be God unless the creature of God is delivered from that which is enslaving and dehumanizing.</p>
<p class="indent">If we take seriously the objective reality of divine liberation as a precondition for reconciliation, then it becomes clear that God's salvation is intended for the poor and the helpless, and it is identical with their liberation from oppression. That is why salvation is defined in political terms in the Old Testament and why the prophets take their stand on the side of the poor within the community of Israel. As we have demonstrated, throughout the biblical story, God stands with the weak and against the strong. Thus fellowship with God is made possible by God's righteous activity in the world to set right the conditions for reconciliation. God's setting right the conditions for divine-human fellowship is liberation, without which fellowship would be impossible. To speak of reconciliation apart from God's liberating activity is to ignore the divine basis of the divine-human fellowship.</p>
<p class="indent">The close relationship between reconciliation and liberation is also found in the New Testament. Jesus is the Reconciler because he is first <a id="page_211"/>the Liberator. He was born in Bethlehem and “laid in a manger, because there was no place in the inn” (Luke 2:7 <small>RSV</small>). He was baptized with the sinners, the poor and the oppressed, because he was the Oppressed One sent from God to give wholeness to broken and wretched lives. Jesus lived and worked among them, and on the cross he died for them. In him God entered history and affirmed the condition of the oppressed as his own existence, thereby making clear that poverty and sickness contradict the divine intentions for humanity. The cross and the resurrection are God's defeat of slavery. We are now free to be reconciled with God because God has destroyed the power of death and sin. We do not have to be afraid of death anymore. Our existence is reconciled with the Creator's existence.</p>
<p class="indent">Unfortunately this essential connection between liberation and reconciliation is virtually absent in the history of Christian thought. Theologians emphasized the objectivity of reconciliation, but they lost sight of the fact that reconciliation is grounded in history. This tendency is undoubtedly due partly to the influence of Greek thought and the Church's political status after Constantine. The former led to rationalism and the latter produced a “gospel” that was politically meaningless for the oppressed. Reconciliation was defined on timeless “rational” grounds and was thus separated from God's liberating deeds in history. The political status of the post-Constantinian church, involving both alliance and competition with the state, led to definitions of the atonement that favored the powerful and excluded the interests of the poor.</p>
<p class="indent">Anselm, the famous archbishop of Canterbury, is a case in point. He asked the soteriological question: “<i>Cur deus homo</i>?” (Why the God-man?). And he answered that question from a rationalistic viewpoint that was meaningless for the oppressed. His theory has been summarized as follows:</p>
<p class="block">Man, by sin, has done dishonor to God. His debt is to God alone. God's nature demands “satisfaction.” Man, who owes obedience at all times, has nothing wherewith to make good past disobedience. Yet, if satisfaction is to be made at all, it can be rendered only by one who shares human nature, who is himself man, and yet as God has something of infinite value to offer. Such a being is the God-man. Not only is his sacrifice a satisfaction, it deserves a reward. That reward is the eternal blessedness of his brethren.<sup><a href="notes.xhtml#ch10-fnr2" id="ch10-fn2">2</a></sup></p>
<a id="page_212"/>
<p class="body-text1">A neat rational theory but useless as a leverage against political oppression. It dehistoricizes the work of Christ, separating it from God's liberating act in history.</p>
<p class="indent">The same is true of Anselm's critic, Abelard, who rejected the satisfaction theory and opted for what has been called the “moral influence” theory. In his perspective, God sent Jesus Christ as a revelation of divine love to sinful people and as a teacher and example. And through Jesus’ life, which became the ground of the forgiveness of sins, faith and love are aroused in sinful people. Abelard not only de-emphasized the objective reality of divine reconciliation, he apparently failed to grasp the radical quality of evil and oppression.</p>
<p class="indent">In the early 1950s Gustaf Aulén<sup><a href="notes.xhtml#ch10-fnr3" id="ch10-fn3">3</a></sup> revived what he calls the “classical” theory of the atonement with its emphasis on God's victory over the principalities and powers, Satan and his demons. He contends that this is the view of the New Testament, the early Church Fathers and also of Martin Luther. Here the focus is upon the objective reality of reconciliation as defined by God's victory over Satan and his powers. Reconciliation means that sin, death, and Satan—objective realities holding people in bondage—have been decisively defeated on the cross. We are now free to have fellowship with God.</p>
<p class="indent">Although Aulén's concern is “motif-research,” which is itself nonpolitical, the classical theory offers contemporary theology an opportunity to return to the biblical emphasis on God's victory over the powers of evil. The difficulty with Aulén's analysis is that his theological method (motif-research) limits the contemporary applications of his findings as they might be related to oppressed peoples. (This may be due to his own political situation in Sweden where the church and state have similar interests.) But if the classical theory is radicalized politically, then liberation and reconciliation can once again be grounded in history and related to God's fight against the powers of enslavement. The principalities and powers of evil, mythically expressed in the figure of Satan, represent not only metaphysical realities but earthly realities as well. They are the American system, symbolized in President Gerald Ford and other government officials, who oppress the poor, humiliate the weak, and make heroes out of rich capitalists. The principalities and powers are that system of government symbolized in the Pentagon, which bombed and killed helpless people in Vietnam and Cambodia and attributed such obscene atrocities to the accidents of war. They are <a id="page_213"/>that system, symbolized in the police departments and prison officials, which shoots and kills defenseless blacks for being <i>black</i> and for demanding their right to exist. As long as Atticas exist and George Jacksons are killed, then we know that Satan is not dead. He is alive in those who do his work. Satan is present in those powers, visible and invisible, that destroy humanity and enslave the weak and the helpless. And it is against Satan and his powers that Christ has given his life. Because Christ has been raised from the dead, we know that the decisive victory has been won. We have been redeemed, that is, set free from the powers of slavery and death. This is the objective side of the biblical view of reconciliation.</p>
<p class="head" id="sub2"><b>THE SUBJECTIVE REALITY OF RECONCILIATION</b></p>
<p class="indent">Because God has liberated the oppressed from bondage, thereby making freedom possible, the oppressed must now accept their freedom by joining God in the fight against injustice and oppression. Reconciliation then is not only what God does in order to deliver oppressed people from captivity; it is also what oppressed people do in order to remain faithful to their new gift of freedom. Reconciliation is not only justification, God's righteous deliverance of slaves from bondage; it is sanctification, the slaves’ acceptance of their new way of life, their refusal to define existence in any other way than in freedom. Reconciliation is not simply freedom <i>from</i> oppression and slavery; it is also freedom <i>for</i> God. That is why Paul says: “For freedom Christ has set us free” (Gal. 5:1 <small>RSV</small>).</p>
<p class="indent">The objective reality of reconciliation cannot be separated from its subjective appropriation. They both belong together as “different ‘moments’ with a different bearing”<sup><a href="notes.xhtml#ch10-fnr4" id="ch10-fn4">4</a></sup> of the one divine act of reconciliation. God did not simply deliver Israel from Egypt and let it go at that. “If you <i>obey</i> my voice and keep my covenant, you shall be my own possession among all peoples” (Exod. 19:5 <small>RSV</small>). Yahweh demanded obedience. Israel must live as a liberated people.</p>
<p class="indent">Commenting on the indissoluble relation between justification and sanctification, Barth writes: “ ‘I will be your God’ is the justification of man. ‘Ye shall be my people’ is his sanctification.”<sup><a href="notes.xhtml#ch10-fnr5" id="ch10-fn5">5</a></sup> Here Barth rightly sees that God's decision to be for humans involves simultaneously the human decision (through the work of the Holy Spirit) to be for God. Dietrich Bonhoeffer made a similar point with <a id="page_214"/>his distinction between “cheap grace” and “costly grace.” “Cheap grace is grace without discipleship, grace without the cross, grace without Jesus Christ, living incarnate.” Costly grace is the opposite. It recognizes that reconciliation is bound up with repentance and that there is no “justification of sin without the justification of the sinner.”<sup><a href="notes.xhtml#ch10-fnr6" id="ch10-fn6">6</a></sup> And “when Christ calls a man, he bids only him come and die.”<sup><a href="notes.xhtml#ch10-fnr7" id="ch10-fn7">7</a></sup></p>
<p class="indent">It is in the context of costly grace that we must understand the biblical view of reconciliation. When Paul says that Christ is “our peace, who has made us both one [Jew and Gentile, male and female, black and white] and has broken down the dividing wall of hostility,” he is writing about the objective reality of reconciliation, accomplished through the cross and the resurrection of Jesus. But when Jew and Gentile, male and female, black and white begin to live on the basis of that reality, raising theological rhetoric to political reality—that is sanctification, the subjective appropriation of divine liberation. When Paul says, “For by grace you have been saved…and this is not your own doing” but “is a gift of God” (Eph. 2:8 <small>RSV</small>), that is justification, God's act of freedom for God's people. But when he continues, “We are his workmanship, created in Christ Jesus for good works” (Eph. 2:10 <small>RSV</small>), that is sanctification, human response to God's gift of freedom.</p>
<p class="indent">Because God's act for humanity involves humanity's liberation from bondage, human response to God's grace of liberation is an act for our oppressed brothers and sisters. There can be no reconciliation with God unless the hungry are fed, the sick are healed, and justice is given to the poor. The justified person is at once the sanctified person, one who knows that his or her freedom is inseparable from the liberation of the weak and the helpless.</p>
<p class="indent">This is the meaning of Jesus’ parable of the Last Judgment (Matt. 25:31ff.). People are placed on the right and on the left according to their ministering to the neighbor. Because the ones on the right met the needs of the oppressed, they were accepted into the Kingdom—even though they were not consciously trying to get there. For them the neighbor was an end in himself or herself and not a means to an end. The ones on the left, who were rejected, were surprised at their rejection because they wanted to make it into the Kingdom. They failed to recognize the connection between the poor and the Son of man. For if they had known that the despised were, in fact, Jesus, they would have been prepared to help them, because they <a id="page_215"/>just wanted to be in the Kingdom. That is why they said, “Lord, when did we see thee hungry or thirsty or a stranger or naked or sick or in prison, and did not minister to thee?” (Matt. 25:44 <small>RSV</small>). The answer was simple: “Truly, I say to you, as you did it not to one of the least of these, you did it not to me” (Matt. 25:45 <small>RSV</small>).</p>
<p class="head" id="sub3"><b>RECONCILIATION: BLACK AND WHITE</b></p>
<p class="indent1">Theologians write these days about reconciliation, explaining its relationship to justification and sanctification, but they seldom get to the core of the issue. New Testament scholars can tell us whether Jesus uttered this or that saying, and whether it is a variation of an earlier saying in Deuteronomy, Psalms, or Second Isaiah. That is good. Systematic theologians can tell us about the philosophical influences in this or that theology from Justin and Origen to Karl Barth and Paul Tillich. And that too is to be commended. But they seldom seem to be able to get to the point that makes the gospel <i>the</i> gospel, in the light of which all of their scholarly investigations must be evaluated. I want to know why they spend time writing about these things, and what it all means in the light of the cross and the resurrection. Specifically, I want to know how reconciliation is related to Asia, Africa, Latin America, and every other section of this human globe where people are oppressed socially, politically, and economically. What does reconciliation have to do with Macedonia A.M.E. Church where the people still claim that they are “on their way to the promised land”? What are we to make of this doctrine, subjectively and objectively, in a society where black people define the promised land as a liberation from white oppression?</p>
<p class="indent">(1) From God's side, reconciliation between blacks and whites means that God is unquestionably on the side of the oppressed blacks struggling for justice. God's justification is God's righteous and total identification with black existence, becoming one with it and revealing that the wrong committed against God's people will not be tolerated. As God delivered the Israelites from Egypt, God will also deliver black people from white oppression. Black slaves expressed that truth in song:</p>
<p class="paras1">Slavery chain done broke at last, broke at last, broke at last,</p>
<a id="page_216"/>
<p class="paras11">Slavery chain done broke at last,</p>
<p class="paras11">Going to praise God till I die.</p>
<p class="body-text1">Reconciliation means that God enters into black history and breaks down the hostility and racism of white people. It means the end of “driver's driving,” “Master's hollering,” and “missus’ scolding.” Thus black slaves sang with confidence:</p>
<p class="paras1">Children, we shall be free</p>
<p class="paras11">When the Lord shall appear.</p>
<p class="paras11">Give ease to the sick</p>
<p class="paras11">Give sight to the blind, Enable the cripple to walk;</p>
<p class="paras11">He'll raise the dead from under the earth,</p>
<p class="paras11">And give them permission to talk.</p>
<p class="body-text1">God's reconciliation means destroying all forms of slavery and oppression in white America so that the people of color can affirm the authenticity of their political freedom.</p>
<p class="indent">We must keep in mind that when Paul said, “God was in Christ reconciling the world unto himself,” he was not making a sentimental comment on race relations. God's reconciling act is centered on the cross, and it reveals the depths of divine suffering for the reconciliation of enslaved humanity. On the cross, God encounters evil and suffering, the principalities and the powers that hold people in captivity; and the resurrection is the sign that these powers have been decisively defeated, even though they are still very active in the world. But the victory in Jesus’ resurrection is God's liberating act that makes possible human reconciliation with God. We have been given the gift of freedom to fight with God in the liberation struggle. We can now be reconciled with God because God has removed the conditions of alienation as represented in the powers of evil.</p>
<p class="indent">When this biblical message is translated into twentieth-century America, the meaning is obvious. The principalities and powers that are still active in the world, despite God's victory in Jesus’ resurrection, are represented concretely in the structures of injustice that oppress the weak and humiliate the poor. They are the demonic forces of white racism that enslave black, red, and brown people in the name of freedom and liberty. In this social context, then, God's <a id="page_217"/>reconciliation is God's liberating work against these powers. Divine justification is the removal of oppressed black people from the control of white power, thereby making it possible for the enslaved to be free.</p>
<p class="indent">While divine reconciliation, for oppressed blacks, is connected with the joy of liberation from the controlling power of white people, for whites divine reconciliation is connected with God's wrathful destruction of white values. Everything that white oppressors hold dear is now placed under the judgment of Jesus’ cross. This is a difficult pill for the white theologians and church people to swallow, because they have so much invested in the status quo. And it is likely that they will continue to rationalize the meaning of divine reconciliation in “spiritual” and nonpolitical terms. But God's will to liberate the little ones and to bring them “home to glory” will not be defeated by white piety or rhetoric. The new age is coming in, and through God's will to reconcile the oppressed to God. This faith stands at the center of black religious experience. Though blacks were enslaved and oppressed by white people, blacks still continued to sing that “we'll soon be free, when the Lord will call us home.” Despite the present condition of suffering, their present reconciliation with God enabled them to see God's future, and they expressed it in song:</p>
<p class="para1">When I gets to heaven, gonna be at ease,</p>
<p class="para">Me an’ my God gonna do as we please.</p>
<p class="indent1">Here divine reconciliation was both a future and a present reality. It was God breaking into the conditions of servitude and destroying white definitions of black existence. Anselm is right: the atonement means that God takes our place, and does for us what we could not do for ourselves. However, the problem of sin is not a legalistic issue connected with God's honor in abstract theory. The problem of sin is an alienation from God that is always connected with injustice and oppression. Thus the atonement of Jesus Christ represents God taking the place of the oppressed in history so that they might be given the freedom to create a new future as defined by the liberation struggle in history. Instead of black people having to accept the consequence of white oppression, Jesus takes our place and undergoes the depth of the pain of being black in a white racist society and thereby transforms the condition of alienation into the possibility and the actuality of reconciliation. Through his taking our place and becoming black in a <a id="page_218"/>white racist society, black people's existence is radically transformed <i>objectively</i>. This objective act of God in Jesus Christ's present existence with us means that God has performed a reconciling act of liberation quite independently of our faithful response. God's reconciliation is real because Jesus is real. He is the power of divine presence in our world that makes freedom possible, whether we accept it or not. It was black people's knowledge of what God has done for them that enabled them to sing and preach about the certainty of their reconciliation even though their present existence was characterized by slavery. They merely lived the truth of this song:</p>
<p class="para1">Don't be weary, traveller,</p>
<p class="para">Come along home, come home.</p>
<p class="para">Don't be weary, traveller,</p>
<p class="para">Come along home, come home.</p>
<p class="para1">My head is wet with the midnight dew,</p>
<p class="para">Come along home, come home.</p>
<p class="para">The mornin’ star was a witness too,</p>
<p class="para">Come along home, come home.</p>
<p class="para1">Keep a-goin’, traveller,</p>
<p class="para">Come along home, come home.</p>
<p class="para">Keep a-singin’ all the way,</p>
<p class="para">Come along home, come home.</p>
<p class="indent1">(2) On the human side, reconciliation means that we blacks must accept our new existence by struggling against all who try to make us slaves. We must refuse to let whites define the terms of reconciliation. Instead, we must participate in God's revolutionary activity in the world by changing the political, economic, and social structures so that the distinctions between rich and poor, oppressed and oppressors, are no longer a reality among people. To be reconciled with white people means fighting against their power to enslave, reducing masters to the human level, thereby making them accountable to black liberation. We must let them know that there can be no communication between masters and slaves until the <i>status</i> of master no longer exists. The task of black people is to rebel against all white masters, destroying their pretensions to authority and ridiculing the <a id="page_219"/>symbols of power. White people must be made to realize that reconciliation is a costly experience. It is not holding hands and singing “Black and white together” and “We shall overcome.” Reconciliation means <i>death</i>, and only those who are prepared to die in the struggle for freedom will experience new life with God.</p>
<p class="indent">Unfortunately, my black colleague, J. Deotis Roberts, has distorted the Christian view of black-white reconciliation precisely at this point. He implies that black people ought to forget their slavery and oppression and be prepared to join hands, in Christian love, with white oppressors. He writes:</p>
<p class="block">Christians are called to be agents of reconciliation. We have been able to love and forgive…. The assertion that all are “one in Christ Jesus” must henceforth mean that all slave-master, servant-boss, inferior-superior frames of reference between blacks and whites have been abolished.<sup><a href="notes.xhtml#ch10-fnr8" id="ch10-fn8">8</a></sup></p>
<p class="body-text1">I simply cannot accept either the theological or the sociological basis of Roberts's analysis of reconciliation. In his concern to make reconciliation a central theme in Black Theology, he not only distorts its Christian meaning, but contradicts his own argument. On the one hand, Roberts says quite clearly that “<i>liberation</i> is a proper precondition for reconciliation in the area of race relations”;<sup><a href="notes.xhtml#ch10-fnr9" id="ch10-fn9">9</a></sup> on the other, he insists that blacks “must hold up at all times the possibility for black-white interracial fellowship and cooperation.”<sup><a href="notes.xhtml#ch10-fnr10" id="ch10-fn10">10</a></sup> If liberation is the precondition of reconciliation, why then should enslaved blacks assure white oppressors that we are ready to be reconciled when the latter have no intention of loosing the chains of oppression? Either liberation is the foundation of reconciliation or it is not. Roberts will have to make a decision about his theological perspective. It is not the case that I have overlooked reconciliation, as Roberts implies,<sup><a href="notes.xhtml#ch10-fnr11" id="ch10-fn11">11</a></sup> but rather, that I refuse to let white people define its terms. I contend that only black people can define the terms on which our reconciliation with white people will become real. I cannot say, as Roberts does:</p>
<p class="blockz">A Black Theology that takes reconciliation seriously must work at the task of inter-communication between blacks and whites under the assumption that for those who are open to truth, there may be communication from the inside out, but at the same <a id="page_220"/>time there may be communication from the outside in. In the latter sense, white Christians may be led to understand and work with blacks for liberation and reconciliation on an interracial basis.<sup><a href="notes.xhtml#ch10-fnr12" id="ch10-fn12">12</a></sup></p>
<p class="block0z">Because a man is black and poor does not mean that he is heaven bound. Neither does whiteness and great wealth bar a man from the Kingdom.<sup><a href="notes.xhtml#ch10-fnr13" id="ch10-fn13">13</a></sup></p>
<p class="indent1">In these quotations and in the book as a whole, Roberts opens the door not only for white people to be oppressors and Christians <i>at the same time</i>, but also for them to participate in black liberation and to set the <i>terms</i> of our reconciliation with them. This assumption is unbiblical and unhistorical. Indeed, in black history, reconciliation and liberation on white terms have always meant death for black people.</p>
<p class="indent">Whenever black people have entered into a mutual relation with white people, with rare exceptions, the relationship has always worked to the detriment of our struggle. From the abolitionist movement of the nineteenth century to the recent civil rights struggle of the 1950s and 60s, whites demonstrated that they cannot follow but must always lead. Thus there was a split between Frederick Douglass and William Garrison, Henry Garnet and Maria Chapman. Garnet's reply to Maria Chapman's attack on his perspective should be stamped on the consciousness of all blacks who are optimistic about black-white reconciliation.</p>
<p class="block">I was born in slavery, [wrote Garnet] and have escaped, to tell you and others, what the monster has done, and is still doing. It, therefore, astonishes me to think that you should desire to sink me again to the condition of a <i>slave</i>, by forcing me to think as you do. My crime is, that I have dared to think, and act, contrary to your opinion…. If it has come to this, that I must think and act as you do, because you are an abolitionist, or be exterminated by your thunder, then I do not hesitate to say that your abolitionism is abject slavery.<sup><a href="notes.xhtml#ch10-fnr14" id="ch10-fn14">14</a></sup></p>
<p class="indent1">Whether for us or against us, white people seem to think that they know what is best for our struggle. It was this white attitude that led to the rise of black power and the exclusion of white people from the <a id="page_221"/>civil rights struggle in the 1960s. Black people came to realize that our liberation depends solely on our actions and decisions and not on white folks. From the black power consciousness emerged Black Theology, a theological enterprise defined of, for, and by black people in the struggle of freedom.</p>
<p class="indent">Whether we like it or not, the days of integration are over, although this does not mean that we blacks are <i>for</i> separation. It means that separation is a fact of life. The ghettos of this country are ample proof that white folks intend to keep it that way. Thus it is absurd to talk about reconciliation to people who are determined to separate us for the purpose of oppression. Our task, then, is to begin to develop structures of behavior that do not depend on white folks’ goodwill. We must recognize that our liberation begins and ends with the decisions we make and the actions we take to implement them. All talk about reconciliation with white oppressors, with mutual dialogue about its meaning, has no place in black power or Black Theology.</p>
<p class="indent">I am not ruling out the <i>rare</i> possibility of conversion among white oppressors, an event that I have already spoken of in terms of white people becoming black. But conversion in the biblical sense is a <i>radical</i> experience, and it ought not to be identified with white sympathy for blacks or with a pious feeling in white folks’ hearts. In the Bible, conversion is closely identified with repentance, and both mean a radical “reorientation of one's whole life and personality, which includes the adoption of a new ethical line of conduct, a forsaking of sin and a turning to righteousness.”<sup><a href="notes.xhtml#ch10-fnr15" id="ch10-fn15">15</a></sup> Or, as Günther Bornkamm puts it: “Repentance…means: to lay hold on the salvation which is at hand, and to give up everything for it.”<sup><a href="notes.xhtml#ch10-fnr16" id="ch10-fn16">16</a></sup> Thus Jesus speaks of the Kingdom as a “treasure hidden in a field, which a man found and covered up; then in his joy he goes and sells all that he has and buys that field” (Matt. 13:44 <small>RSV</small>). The point is that everything must be sacrificed for the reality now present in the midst of human existence. The person who repents is the one who sells all and redefines his or her life in commitment to the Kingdom of God. That is why, in the Bible and the black religious experience, repentance is connected with <i>death</i>. It means dying to sin and alienation and being born anew in Jesus Christ and thus living in faithful obedience to God's will to make whole the brokenness of human existence. Therefore, there can be no forgiveness of sins without repentance, and no repentance without the gift of faith to struggle with and for the freedom of the oppressed.</p>
<a id="page_222"/>
<p class="indent">When whites undergo the true experience of conversion wherein they die to whiteness and are reborn anew in order to struggle <i>against</i> white oppression and <i>for</i> the liberation of the oppressed, there is a place for them in the black struggle of freedom. Here reconciliation becomes God's gift of blackness through the oppressed of the land. But it must be made absolutely clear that it is the black community that decides both the <i>authenticity</i> of white conversion and also the part these converts will play in the black struggle of freedom. The converts can have nothing to say about the validity of their conversion experience or what is best for the community or their place in it, <i>except</i> as permitted by the oppressed community itself. As is true of every member of the black community, accountability remains an essential ingredient of all who share in the struggle of freedom. But white converts, if there are any to be found, must be <i>made</i> to realize that they are like babies who have barely learned how to walk and talk. Thus they must be told when to speak and what to say, otherwise they will be excluded from our struggle. What is always ruled out is white converts using their experience in our community as evidence <i>against</i> blacks, claiming that reconciliation with whites is possible. Whites must be made to realize that they are not only accountable to Roy Wilkins but also to Imamu Baraka. And if the latter says that reconciliation is out of the question, then nothing the former says can change that reality, for both are equally members of the black struggle of freedom. Unless whites can get every single black person to agree that reconciliation is realized, there is no place whatsoever for white rhetoric about the reconciling love of blacks and whites. For if whites are truly converted to our struggle, they know that reconciliation is a gift that excludes boasting. It is God's gift of blackness made possible through the presence of the divine in the social context of black existence. With the gift comes a radical change in life-style wherein one's value system is now defined by the oppressed engaged in the liberation struggle.</p>
<p class="indent">Black people must be aware of the extreme dangers of speaking too lightly of reconciliation with whites. Just because we work with them and sometimes worship alongside them should be no reason to claim that they are truly Christians and thus a part of our struggle. Every mistake we make regarding white integrity will lead to the further entrenchment of our oppression by white people. This problem is quite obvious in Roberts's treatment of reconciliation. He seems to think that merely through proper theological analysis, according to white rules, white <a id="page_223"/>people would come to see the truth of what he was trying to say. He apparently did not realize that in his call for reconciliation alongside the theme of liberation, whites would hear <i>only</i> the former but completely disregard its connection with the latter. That is why liberation <i>must</i> be expressed in uncompromising language and actions, for only then can the conditions be created for reconciliation. A word about reconciliation too soon or at the wrong time to the oppressors only grants them more power to oppress black people. Roberts said what should <i>not</i> have been said, because he should have known that, despite his honest intention to face the truth of the gospel, white oppressors are not prepared to hear the truth, much less do it, because truth would condemn them. Thus his proclamation that we need reconciliation was in bad taste for blacks struggling for freedom, since it was obvious that whites were not prepared to hear what he was trying to say. On white ears, his call for reconciliation in opposition to my theological emphasis on liberation would merely mean that whites would be granted permission by a black theologian to separate love from justice, reconciliation from liberation, despite Roberts's feeble attempt to hold them together. That accounts for the enthusiastic response to his book among the white church establishment, both liberal and conservative. When white conservatives, the people who have been most blatant in their oppression of blacks, begin to support his theological work, then it should be obvious to brother Roberts that he is on the wrong theological track.<sup><a href="notes.xhtml#ch10-fnr17" id="ch10-fn17">17</a></sup></p>
<p class="indent">It is appropriate to conclude this book with a restatement of the call to black theologians to speak the truth to the people. Again we must be reminded that truth is not a concept or an idea to be discovered in a theology or philosophy textbook. Truth is a <i>liberating event</i>, a divine happening in the lives of the people. It is that reality that breaks into black existence and gives the people the strength and courage to “keep on pushing,” so that they can realize in their present what they see coming on the horizon of the future. To do theology in the light of this black truth, we black theologians must recognize the conceptual limitations of white academic categories—whether in theology, philosophy, or history of religions. This black truth has its own uniqueness and thus cannot be truly understood with a conceptual framework from Karl Barth or Mircea Eliade. The categories for an analysis of black truth must be derived from the socioreligious context of the people who live on the basis of its reality. If the black theologian is to interpret black truth correctly, he must be convicted <a id="page_224"/>by this truth, for only then can he understand what black people are talking about when they testify that the God of Jesus “picked them up and turned them around and placed their feet on solid ground.” If we make the mistake of listening too much to white theologians and too little to black witnesses of the truth, our theology will be black in name only, because it will not represent the hopes and dreams of the people. Thus everything we do and say in theology must be defined by God's liberating presence as witnessed in the Scriptures, the songs, and the tales of black people.</p>
<p class="indent">When the question is asked, “What does reconciliation mean?” we must not consult the theological treatises of Euro-American theologians for the answer. These theologians cannot tell us what reconciliation means in black-white relations, because their consciousness is defined by the political structures responsible for our humiliation and oppression. To know what reconciliation means in the black perspective, we must investigate the black sources of the truth—the sermons, prayers, tales of our people. Here we will find that reconciliation is not a theological idea but a human struggle, a fight to create dignity in an inhuman situation. Reconciliation is not sitting down with white liberals and radicals, assuring them that we don't have any hard feelings toward them. Rather, it is that vision of God's presence in our lives that lets us know that the world will be changed only through our blood, sweat, and tears. It is that feeling of togetherness with our brothers and sisters in struggle, knowing that “we shall overcome” “in that great gettin’ up mornin’.”</p>
<p class="indent">From the experience of divine truth in our social existence, we now know that reconciliation must start <i>first</i> with black brothers and sisters who have suffered the pain of a broken community. Therefore as black theologians, we must begin to ask, <i>not</i> about black people's reconciliation with white oppressors, but about our reconciliation with each other. We must unmask the social and political structures that make us kill and shoot each other. Reconciliation, like love, must begin at home before it can spread abroad. As long as the oppressors can keep us divided and fighting among ourselves, their task of keeping black people oppressed is made that much easier. In this context, reconciliation <i>precedes</i> liberation. For unless we are reconciled with each other and begin to join hands in the struggle of black freedom, we black people will not be able to survive in this troubled world. Unless we can create structures that will bring us together so that our unity with <a id="page_225"/>each other will lay the foundation for talk about reconciliation with others, we will not survive to be unified with others.</p>
<p class="indent">It is therefore black people's reconciliation with each other, in America, Africa, and the islands of the sea, that must be the black theologians’ primary concern. For unless we can get together with our African brothers and sisters for the shaping of our future, white capitalists in America and Europe will destroy us. We must not forget that we are engaged in a struggle of survival and liberation, and our children are counting on us to prepare the world for them for living. We must not fail them, because they are depending on us to give an accountability of our words and deeds. Thus if we black theologians are going to interpret correctly the meaning of the black people's struggle, we cannot be concerned with what white theologians are going to say about our theological perspective. Black theologians are not called to interpret the gospel in a form acceptable to white oppressors. Our calling is derived from the people who have been through the trials and tribulations of this world. Our task is to interpret their struggle in the light of God's presence with them, liberating and thus reconciling the oppressed to themselves and to God. We must let white oppressors know that we are on the “battlefield of the Lord” and are determined through God's grace to fight until we die. We must make clear to them that we will not be distracted from our liberation with their obscene talk about “love” and “forgiveness.” And to white people who insist that we blacks are preaching hatred, we merely say to whites, with Joseph Cotter:</p>
<p class="para1">Brothers, come</p>
<p class="para">And let us go unto our God</p>
<p class="para">And when we stand before him</p>
<p class="para">I shall say—</p>
<p class="para">Lord, I do not hate,</p>
<p class="para">I am hated.</p>
<p class="para">I scourge no one,</p>
<p class="para">I am scourged.</p>
<p class="para">I covet no lands,</p>
<p class="para">My lands are coveted.</p>
<p class="para">I mock no peoples,</p>
<p class="para">My people are mocked.</p>
<p class="para">And [white boy] what shall you say?<sup><a href="notes.xhtml#ch10-fnr18" id="ch10-fn18">18</a></sup></p>
</div>
</body>
</html>