<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>chapter01</title>
<link href="ebook_style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
<meta content="urn:uuid:5bf1d25e-4978-4604-b0f7-22d24fac0880" name="Adept.expected.resource"/>
</head>
<body>
<div>
<a id="page_1"/>
<h2 class="chap_tit"><span class="underline">CHAPTER 1</span></h2>
<p class="chapz"><b>Introduction</b></p>
<p class="indent">I was born in Fordyce, Arkansas, a small town about sixty miles southwest of Little Rock. My parents moved to Bearden, fourteen miles from Fordyce, when I was a year old. In Bearden, a small community with approximately eight hundred whites and four hundred blacks, two important realities shaped my consciousness: the black Church experience and the sociopolitical significance of white people.</p>
<p class="indent">The black Church introduced me to the essence of life as expressed in the rhythm and feelings of black people in Bearden, Arkansas. At Macedonia African Methodist Episcopal Church (A.M.E.), I encountered the presence of the divine Spirit, and my soul was moved and filled with an aspiration for freedom. Through prayer, song, and sermon, God made frequent visits to the black community in Bearden and reassured the people of God's concern for their well-being and the divine will to bring them safely home. Home was often identified with heaven—that “otherworldly” reality beyond the reach of the dreadful limitations of this world. It was that place on the “other side of Jordan,” “down by the riverside,” where the streets are gold and the gates are pearl. Home was that eschatological reality where the oppressed would “lay down that heavy load,” singing and shouting because “there would be nobody there to turn [them] out.” Every Sunday the black brothers and sisters of Macedonia experienced a foretaste of their “home in glory” when God's Spirit visited their worship, and they responded with thankfulness and humility, singing joyfully:</p>
<p class="blocka">Sooner-a-will be done with the trouble of this world,<br/>Sooner-a-will be done with the trouble of this world,<br/>Going home to live with God.</p>
<a id="page_2"/>
<p class="indent">I responded to the black Church experience by offering myself for membership at Macedonia when I was only ten and by entering the ministry at the early age of sixteen. It was a natural response, a response consistent with the beauty and joy of black life and an expression of my deep yearning for human definitions not bound by this earthly sphere. The black Church taught me how to deal with the contradictions of life and provided a way to create meaning in a society not of my own making. In the larger “secular” black community, this perspective on life is often called the “art of survival”; but in the black Church, we call it the “grace of God.” It is called <i>survival</i> because it is a way of remaining physically alive in a situation of oppression without losing one's dignity. We call it <i>grace</i> because we know it to be an unearned gift from God who is the giver of “every good and perfect gift.” This is what black people mean when they sing: “We've come this far by faith, leaning on the Lord, trusting in his holy Word.”</p>
<p class="indent">Unfortunately the black Church experience was not my <i>only</i> experience in Bearden, Arkansas. The presence of eight hundred whites made me realize, at an early age, that black existence cannot, indeed <i>must</i> not, be taken for granted. White people did everything within their power to define black reality, to tell us who we were—and their definition, of course, extended no further than their social, political, and economic interests. They tried to make us believe that God created black people to be white people's servants. We blacks, therefore, were <i>expected</i> to enjoy plowing their fields, cleaning their houses, mowing their lawns, and working in their sawmills. And when we showed signs of displeasure with our so-called elected and inferior status, they called us “uppity niggers” and quickly attempted to put us in our “place.”</p>
<p class="indent">To be put in one's place, as defined by white society, was a terrible reality for blacks in Bearden. It meant being beaten by the town cop and spending an inordinate length of time in a stinking jail. It meant attending “separate but equal” schools, going to the balcony when attending a movie, and drinking water from a “colored” fountain. It meant refusing to retaliate when called a nigger—unless you were prepared to leave town at the precise moment of your rebellion. You had no name except your first name or “boy”; and if you were past the age of sixty-five, you might attain the dubious honor of being called “uncle” or “auntie.”</p>
<a id="page_3"/>
<p class="indent">The white people of Bearden, of course, thought of themselves as “nice” white folks. They did not lynch and rape niggers, and many attended church every Sunday. They honestly believed that they were <i>Christian</i> people, faithful servants of God. Their affirmation of faith in Jesus Christ was a source of puzzlement to me, because they excluded blacks not only socially but also from their church services. My brother and I (aspiring young theologues at the time) often discussed the need to confront the white “Christians” of Bearden with the demands of the gospel by invading their Sunday worship service with our presence, making them declare publicly that <i>all</i> are not welcome in “God's” house. But the fear of bodily harm prevented us from carrying out that wish.</p>
<p class="indent">If Richard Wright is correct in his contention that “expression springs out of an environment,”<sup><a href="notes.xhtml#ch01-fnr1" id="ch01-fn1">1</a></sup> then I must conclude that my theological reflections are inseparable from the Bearden experience. I say with Claude McKay that “what I write is urged out of my blood” and out of the blood of blacks in Bearden and elsewhere who see what I see, feel what I feel, and love what I love. This is why Black Theology differs in perspective, content, and style from the western theological tradition transmitted from Augustine to Barth. My theology will not be the same as that of my white colleagues at Union Theological Seminary, because our experience is different. They were not born black in Bearden. They did not know about Macedonia A.M.E. Church, and the Black Spirit of God who descended upon that community when folks there gathered for worship and praise to the One who had brought them a “mighty long way.” They could not know the significance of black prayer, because they had not heard nor felt the invested meaning of those familiar words as Brother Elbert Thrower invited the congregation to pray with him a little while:</p>
<p class="block">Once more and again, O Lawd, we come to thee, with bowed heads and humble hearts, thankin’ thee for watchin’ over us last night as we slept and slumbered, and gave us the strength to get up and come to church this mornin’. I thank thee that my last night's sleepin’ couch was not my coolin’ board and my cover was not my windin’ sheet. I thank thee, Lawd, because you have been with me from the earliest rockin’ of my cradle up to this present moment. You know my heart, and you know the <a id="page_4"/>range of our deceitful minds. And if you find anything that shouldn't be, I ask you to pluck it out and cast it into the sea of forgetfulness where it will never rise to harm us in this world.</p>
<p class="body-text1">As familiar as the words of that prayer were the words of “Amazing Grace.” When Sister Ora Wallace raised her melodious voice and filled Macedonia with its rich and resonant tones, the entire congregation joined with her, because “Amazing Grace” spoke to their condition.</p>
<p class="para1">Amazing grace! how sweet the sound,</p>
<p class="para">That saved a wretch like me!</p>
<p class="para">I once was lost, but now am found,</p>
<p class="para">Was blind, but now I see.</p>
<p class="para1">Thro’ many dangers, toils, and snares,</p>
<p class="para">I have already come;</p>
<p class="para">’Tis grace hath bro't me safe thus far,</p>
<p class="para">And grace will lead me home.</p>
<p class="indent1">Ironically, this song was written by an ex-slave trader; but when the sons and daughters of black slaves sang it, “Amazing Grace” was infused with black power and meaning. For blacks in Bearden, the “dangers, toils, and snares” referred to their daily struggle to survive, the ups and downs of black existence, and the attempt to seize a measure of freedom in an extreme situation of oppression. “Amazing Grace” was the miracle of survival, because it is difficult to explain how we made it through slavery, Reconstruction, and the struggle against oppression in the twentieth century. Blacks in Bearden said: “It must have been the grace of God!”</p>
<p class="indent">Because I have lived the Bearden experience, I cannot separate it from my theological perspective. I am a <i>black</i> theologian! I therefore must approach the subject of theology in the light of the black Church and what that means in a society dominated by white people. I did not recognize the methodological implication of that assumption until the summer of 1966 when Willie Ricks sounded the cry of “black power” and Stokely Carmichael joined him as the philosophical spokesman. Yet long before that, I knew in the depths of my being that European and American approaches to theology did not deal with the questions arising out of my experience.</p>
<a id="page_5"/>
<p class="indent">Like most college and seminary students of my generation, I faithfully studied philosophy and theology—from the pre-Socratics to modern existentialism and linguistic analysis, from Justin Martyr, Irenaeus, and Origen to Karl Barth, Bultmann, and Tillich. I was an expert on Karl Barth and knew well the theological issues that shaped his theology. I wrote papers in seminary on the Barth and Brunner debates, the knowledge of God in contemporary theology, Bultmann's program of demythologization, the Tillichian doctrine of God as being-itself, and concluded my formal education with a Ph.D. dissertation on Barth's anthropology. But when I left Garrett Theological Seminary (now Garrett-Evangelical) and Northwestern University (1963) and began to teach at Philander Smith College in Little Rock, Arkansas, I encountered head-on the <i>contradictions</i> of my seminary education as I attempted to inform black students about the significance of theological discourse. What could Karl Barth possibly mean for black students who had come from the cotton fields of Arkansas, Louisiana and Mississippi, seeking to change the structure of their lives in a society that had defined <i>black</i> as nonbeing? What is the significance of Nicea and Chalcedon for those who knew Jesus <i>not</i> as a thought in their heads to be analyzed in relation to a similar thought called God? They knew Jesus as a Savior and a friend, as the “lily of the valley and the bright and morning star.”</p>
<p class="indent">Those black students drove me back to the primary art forms of the black religious experience by refusing to accept a prefabricated theology from the lips of James Cone. I began once more to listen to the heartbeat of black life as reflected in the song and speech of black people. As I did so, I asked myself, What is theology? What is the substance of this “reasoning about God” that the Church has undertaken for nearly twenty centuries? And I knew that Calvin and Bultmann could not answer the question for me. Indeed the heart of the problem was the relation of the black religious experience to my knowledge of classical theology.</p>
<p class="indent">My concern was intensified during the black insurrection in Detroit in the summer of 1967. I had moved the year before to teach in Adrian, Michigan, just seventy miles from Detroit. I remember the feeling of dread and absurdity as I asked myself, What has all this to do with Jesus Christ—his birth in Bethlehem, his baptism with and life among the poor, and his death and resurrection? <a id="page_6"/>I intuitively knew that the responses of white preachers and theologians were not correct. The most sensitive whites merely said: “We deplore the riots but sympathize with the reason for the riots.” This was tantamount to saying: “Of course we raped your women, lynched your men, and ghettoized the minds of your children and you have a right to be upset; but that is no reason for you to burn our buildings. If you people keep acting like that, we will never give you your freedom.”</p>
<p class="indent">I knew that that response was not only humiliating and insulting but wrong. It revealed not only an insensitivity to black pain and suffering but also, and more importantly for my vocation as a theologian, a <i>theological bankruptcy</i>. The education of white theologians did not prepare them to deal with Watts, Detroit, and Newark. What was needed was a new way of looking at theology that must emerge out of the dialectic of black history and culture.</p>
<p class="indent">Instinctively, I went to the Scriptures as the primary source for this new approach and asked, “What has the biblical message to do with the black power revolution?” My answer is found in my first book, <i>Black Theology and Black Power</i> (Seabury, 1969). My second book, <i>A Black Theology of Liberation</i> (Lippincott, 1970), is a continued probing of that question in the light of the classical structures of theology. Although I do not think that those books represent the only possible <i>answers</i>, I do think that it is impossible to do Christian theology with integrity in America without asking the <i>question</i>, What has the gospel to do with the black struggle for liberation?</p>
<p class="indent">Reflecting on those books I realized that something important was missing. They did not show clearly enough the significance of Macedonia A.M.E. Church and the imprint of that community upon my theological consciousness. After all, I was insisting that theology has to arise out of an oppressed community as they seek to understand their place in the history of salvation. Therefore I had to inquire about the theological significance of the black experience as reflected in sermon, song, and story.</p>
<p class="para1">O I been rebuked, and I been scorned,</p>
<p class="para">Done had a hard time sho's you born.</p>
<p class="para1">I don't know what my mother wants to stay here fuh,</p>
<p class="para">Dis ole worl’ ain't been no friend to huh.</p>
<a id="page_7"/>
<p class="para1">If de blues was whiskey,</p>
<p class="para">I'd stay drunk all de time.</p>
<p class="para1">I wrote these blues, gonna sing ’em as I please,</p>
<p class="para">I wrote these blues, gonna sing ’em as I please,</p>
<p class="para">I'm the only one like the way I'm singin’ ’em,</p>
<p class="para">I'll swear to goodness ain't no one else to please.</p>
<p class="body-text1">Some of the results of this inquiry were published as <i>The Spirituals and the Blues</i> (Seabury, 1972; Orbis, 1991).</p>
<p class="indent">The present work deals with the social basis of theology and is concerned with, among other related matters, the problem of the particular and the universal in theological discourse. The book is prompted by three considerations. One is that my previous work obliged me to raise certain important problems but did not provide the context for dealing fully with them. Second, I have been overwhelmed in recent years with the seemingly endless theological fertility of the black experience, not merely as a slogan but in all its rich, concrete detail. Finally, there is the need to respond to a certain kind of critical dismissal of Black Theology, typified by the statement of one distinguished theologian that blacks “are not free to violate the canon of exact reflection, careful weighing of evidence, and apt argument, if they want to make a case for other intellectually responsible listeners.”<sup><a href="notes.xhtml#ch01-fnr2" id="ch01-fn2">2</a></sup> Because theological discourse is <i>universal</i>, I am constrained to reply to this comment, serious despite its patronizing mood, by a fellow theologian. But because theology is also <i>particular</i>, my reply is (in brief) that he is wrong, and that he is wrong because his theological perspective is determined by his whiteness. He is saying nothing other than, “Unless you black people learn to think like us white folks, using our rules, then we will not listen to you.” And that is bad theology.</p>
<p class="indent">For these reasons then—a feeling of unfinished business, a desire to explore further the theological riches of the black experience, and a hope of bridging a gap in the theological community—it seems important to talk about theology and its social sources, beginning with some reflection on the task of the theologian.</p>
<p class="indent">Like most theologians, I believe that Christian theology is language about God. But it's more than that, and it is the “more” that makes theology <i>Christian</i>. Christian theology is language about the <a id="page_8"/><i>liberating</i> character of God's presence in Jesus Christ as he calls his people into being for freedom in the world. The task of the theologian, as a member of the people of God, is to clarify what the Church believes and does in relation to its participation in God's liberating work in the world. In doing this work, the theologian acts in the roles of exegete, prophet, teacher, preacher, and philosopher.</p>
<p class="indent">The theologian is <i>before all else</i> an exegete, simultaneously of Scripture and of existence. To be an exegete of Scripture means that the theologian recognizes the Bible, the witness to God's Word, as a primary source of theological discourse. To be an exegete of existence means that Scripture is not an abstract word, not merely a rational idea. It is God's Word to those who are oppressed and humiliated in this world. The task of the theologian is to probe the depths of Scripture exegetically for the purpose of relating that message to human existence.</p>
<p class="indent">Because theologians are exegetes, they are also prophets. As prophets they must make clear that the gospel of God stands in judgment upon the existing order of injustice. This task involves, as Abraham Heschel said, the “exegesis of existence from a divine perspective,”<sup><a href="notes.xhtml#ch01-fnr3" id="ch01-fn3">3</a></sup> disclosing that God is not indifferent to suffering and not patient with cruelty and falsehood. But God's power and judgment will create justice and order out of chaos.</p>
<p class="indent">As teachers, theologians are instructors in the faith, clarifying its meaning and significance for human life. They investigate the past and relate the struggles of the apostles and the Fathers to our present struggles. Thus they become defenders of the faith, showing its reasonableness, its “fittingness” for the oppressed community now.</p>
<p class="indent">As preachers, theologians are proclaimers of the Word, the truth of Jesus Christ as the Liberator of the poor and the wretched of the land. Here theologians recognize the <i>passionate</i> character of theological language. It is a language of celebration and joy that the freedom promised is already present in the community's struggle for liberation.</p>
<p class="indent">As philosophers, theologians are keen observers of the alternative interpretations of the meaning of life. They know that the gospel cannot be taken for granted, cannot be accepted without the continued test of life in struggle. The philosophic side of the theological task keeps one intellectually honest and open to other perspectives. It guards against dogmatism and provides the groundwork for dialogue with other faiths.</p>
<a id="page_9"/>
<p class="indent">In all roles theologians are committed to that form of existence arising from Jesus’ life, death, and resurrection. They know that the death of the man on the tree has radical implications for those who are enslaved, lynched, and ghettoized in the name of God and country. In order to do theology from that standpoint, they must ask the right questions and then go to the right sources for the answers. The right questions are always related to the basic question: What has the gospel to do with the oppressed of the land and their struggle for liberation? Any theologian who fails to place that question at the center of his or her work has ignored the essence of the gospel.</p>
<p class="indent">Identifying the right source is more complicated. Of course, the sources include Scripture and tradition as they bear witness to the higher source of revelation as particularized and universalized in Jesus Christ. But also with equal and sometimes greater weight, the sources must include the history and culture of oppressed peoples. In the United States and its cultural dependencies that must mean people of color—black, yellow, red, and brown. Here the theologian asks: How have black people understood their history and culture, and how is that understanding related to their faith in Jesus Christ? The places to go for answers are the black sermon, prayer, song, and story. These sources must not be evaluated with the same methods used in analyzing the classical tradition. The methods one employs for analysis must arise from the sources themselves. Only then can one do justice to the complexity of black thought forms and the depth of theological expression found in black life.</p>
<p class="indent">It is of course possible to assume that black religion and white religion are essentially the same, since white people introduced “Christianity” to black people. However, that assumption will deprive the theologian of vital insights into black religious thought forms, because it fails to recognize the significant connection between thought and social existence. If Ludwig Feuerbach is correct in his contention that “Thought is preceded by suffering,”<sup><a href="notes.xhtml#ch01-fnr4" id="ch01-fn4">4</a></sup> and if Karl Marx is at least partly correct in his observation that “it is not consciousness that determines life but life that determines consciousness,”<sup><a href="notes.xhtml#ch01-fnr5" id="ch01-fn5">5</a></sup> then it is appropriate to ask, What is the connection between life and theology? The answer cannot be the same for blacks and whites, because blacks and whites do not share the same life. The lives of a black slave and white slaveholder were radically different. It follows that their thoughts about things divine would also be <a id="page_10"/>different, even though they might sometimes use the same words about God. The life of the slaveholder and others of that culture was that of extending white inhumanity to excruciating limits, involving the enslavement of Africans and the annihilation of Indians. The life of the slave was the slave ship, the auction block, and the plantation regime. It involved the attempt to define oneself without the ordinary historical possibilities of self-affirmation. Therefore when the master and slave spoke of God, they could not possibly be referring to the same reality. When slaves spoke of Jesus Christ, they spoke out of the depths of suffering and despair and the pain of “rolling through an unfriendly world.”</p>
<p class="indent">In order for theologians to recognize the particularity of black religion, they must imagine their way into the environment and the ethos of black slaves, probing the language and rhythm of a people who had to “feel their way along the course of American slavery,” enduring the stress of human servitude, while still affirming their humanity. How could this be? How was it possible for black people to keep their humanity together in the midst of servitude, affirming that the God of Jesus is at work in the world, liberating them from bondage? The record shows clearly that black slaves believed that just as God had delivered Moses and the Israelites from Egyptian bondage, God also will deliver black people from American slavery. And they expressed that theological truth in song.</p>
<p class="para1">Oh Mary, don't you weep, don't you moan,</p>
<p class="para">Oh Mary, don't you weep, don't you moan,</p>
<p class="para">Pharaoh's army got drowned,</p>
<p class="para">Oh Mary, don't you weep.</p>
<p class="indent1">That truth did not come from white preachers; it came from a liberating encounter with the One who is the Author of black faith and existence. As theologians, we must ask: What is the source and meaning of freedom expressed in this spiritual?</p>
<p class="para1">Oh Freedom! Oh Freedom!</p>
<p class="para">Oh Freedom, I love thee!</p>
<p class="para">And before I'll be a slave,</p>
<p class="para">I'll be buried in my grave</p>
<p class="para">And go home to my Lord and be free.</p>
<a id="page_11"/>
<p class="indent1">Here freedom is obviously a structure of, and a movement in, historical existence. It is black slaves accepting the risk and burden of self-affirmation, of liberation in history. That is the meaning of the phrase, “And before I'll be a slave, I'll be buried in my grave.” But without negating history, the last line of this spiritual places freedom beyond the historical context. “And go home to my Lord and be free.” In this context, freedom is eschatological. It is the anticipation of freedom, a vision of a new heaven and a new earth. Black slaves recognized that human freedom is transcendent—that is, a constituent of the future—which made it impossible to identify humanity exclusively with meager attainment in history.</p>
<p class="indent">If theologians could penetrate the depths of that affirmation, then they could understand the significance of John Cassandra's bold affirmation: “You treat me like a mule and I came out like a man.”<sup><a href="notes.xhtml#ch01-fnr6" id="ch01-fn6">6</a></sup> And they might be able to comprehend the theological significance of my mother's melodious rendition of her favorite song:</p>
<p class="para1">This little light of mine,</p>
<p class="para">I'm goin’ to let it shine;</p>
<p class="para">This little light of mine,</p>
<p class="para">I'm goin’ to let it shine,</p>
<p class="para">Let it shine, let it shine.</p>
<p class="para1">Everywhere I go,</p>
<p class="para">I'm goin’ to let it shine;</p>
<p class="para">Everywhere I go,</p>
<p class="para">I'm goin’ to let it shine</p>
<p class="para">Let it shine, let it shine.</p>
<p class="para1">God give it to me,</p>
<p class="para">I'm goin’ to let it shine;</p>
<p class="para">My God give it to me,</p>
<p class="para">I'm goin’ to let it shine,</p>
<p class="para">Let it shine, let it shine.</p>
<p class="body-text1">Here <i>thought</i> is connected with the substance of black life, the rhythm and feelings of a people who intuitively recognized that they were more than what had been defined for them in white society. They were human beings—though whites treated them as nonpersons. <a id="page_12"/>They were <i>somebody</i> despite the humiliating limits placed on their existence.</p>
<p class="indent">The same ethos flourished appropriately in the northern ghettos and the Jim Crow South after the end of institutional slavery. After being told six days of the week that they were nothings by the rulers of white society, on the Sabbath, the first day of the week, black people went to church in order to experience another definition of their humanity. Like Mary Magdalene at the tomb, looking for the body of Jesus, folks in Bearden went to Macedonia looking for the One who said, “I am the way, the truth, and the life” (John 14:6 <small>KJV</small>). And like Mary, they were overjoyed to find him alive and present at Macedonia. That was why they shouted and prayed and why Reverend Hunter preached such fervent sermons, proclaiming Jesus’ presence among them. Those six days of wheeling and dealing with white people always raised the anxious question of whether life was worth living. But when blacks went to church and experienced the presence of Jesus’ Spirit among them, they realized that he bestowed a meaning upon their lives that could not be taken away by white folks. That's why folks at Macedonia sang: “A little talk with Jesus makes it right”—not that “white is right,” but that God had affirmed the rightness of their existence, the righteousness of their being in the world. That affirmation enabled black people to meet “the Man” on Monday morning and to deal with his dehumanizing presence the remainder of the week, knowing that white folks could not destroy their humanity.</p>
<p class="indent">The power of that insight came to me at an early age, although I did not know what it meant. I only knew that when my mother sang her favorite song, “This little light of mine,” she was affirming much more than what was apparent in the lines. And the emotional response of the congregation reinforced my intuitions. The “light” was what illumined her existence, an alternative view of life, different from the current estimations of her being in the world. It was her attempt to make a statement about her life and to say to the world that she is who she is because and only because of the presence of God in her world.</p>
<p class="indent">As a child I could not really understand the meaning and depths of my parents’ faith. It was only recently that the profundity of their religious affirmation broke through to me. I realized that they and the others of Macedonia possessed something essential to the very survival of black humanity, and it ought not be dismissed or belittled. <a id="page_13"/>They were in fact providing me with my only possible theological point of departure.</p>
<p class="indent">In this book, I am not writing simply a personal account of my religious faith, though that is partly involved. I am writing about my parents, Lucy and Charlie Cone, and other black people in Bearden and elsewhere who gave me what it takes to deal with life's contradictions and negations. For it was they who introduced me to the man called Jesus, the One whom they said could “lift your feet out of the muck and miry clay and place them on the solid rock of salvation.” They sometimes called him that “wheel in the middle of the wheel,” the “Rose of Sharon and the Lord of life.” He was their “ever present help in time of trouble.”</p>
<p class="indent">I respect what happened at Nicea and Chalcedon and the theological input of the Church Fathers on Christology; but that source alone is inadequate for finding out the meaning of black folks’ Jesus. It is all right to say as did Athanasius that the Son is <i>homoousia</i> (one substance with the Father), especially if one has a taste for Greek philosophy and a feel for the importance of intellectual distinctions. And I do not want to minimize or detract from the significance of Athanasius’ assertion for faith one iota. But the <i>homoousia</i> question is not a black question. Blacks do not ask whether Jesus is one with the Father or divine and human, though the orthodox formulations are implied in their language. They ask whether Jesus is walking with them, whether they can call him up on the “telephone of prayer” and tell him all about their troubles. To be sure Athanasius’ assertion about the status of the <i>Logos</i> in the Godhead is important for the church's continued christological investigations. But we must not forget that Athanasius’ question about the Son's status in relation to the Father did not arise in the historical context of the slave codes and the slave drivers. And if he had been a black slave in America, I am sure he would have asked a different set of questions. He might have asked about the status of the Son in relation to slaveholders. Perhaps the same is true of Martin Luther and his concern about the ubiquitous presence of Jesus Christ at the Lord's Table. While not diminishing the importance of Luther's theological concern, I am sure that if he had been born a black slave his first question would not have been whether Jesus was at the Lord's Table but whether he was really present at the slave's cabin, whether slaves could expect Jesus to be with them as they tried to survive the cotton field, the whip, and the pistol.</p>
<a id="page_14"/>
<p class="indent">Unfortunately not only white seminary professors but some blacks as well have convinced themselves that only the white experience provides the appropriate context for questions and answers concerning things divine. They do not recognize the narrowness of their experience and the particularity of their theological expressions. They like to think of themselves as <i>universal</i> people. That is why most seminaries emphasize the need for appropriate <i>tools</i> in doing theology, which always means <i>white</i> tools, i.e., knowledge of the language and thought of white people. They fail to recognize that other people also have thought about God and have something significant to say about Jesus’ presence in the world.</p>
<p class="indent">My point is that one's social and historical context decides not only the questions we address to God but also the mode or form of the answers given to the questions. That is the central thesis of this book. And I intend to illustrate it through selected theological themes, with particular reference to the contrasting ways that black and white people think about God.</p>
</div>
</body>
</html>