<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>chapter02</title>
<link href="ebook_style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
<meta content="urn:uuid:5bf1d25e-4978-4604-b0f7-22d24fac0880" name="Adept.expected.resource"/>
</head>
<body>
<div>
<a id="page_15"/>
<h2 class="chap_tit"><span class="underline">CHAPTER 2</span></h2>
<p class="chapz"><b>Speaking the Truth</b></p>
<p class="para1">Speak the truth to the people</p>
<p class="para">Talk sense to the people</p>
<p class="para">Free them with reason</p>
<p class="para">Free them with honesty</p>
<p class="paraz">Free the people with Love and Courage and Care for their being….<sup><a href="notes.xhtml#ch02-fnr1" id="ch02-fn1">1</a></sup></p>
<p class="indent1">Black theologians are living in a period in which we must investigate anew “the problem of the color-line,” as that problem is reflected in the social existence of African peoples. We cannot afford to do theology unrelated to human existence. We cannot be “objective,” but must recognize, with Imamu Baraka, that “there is no objective anything”<sup><a href="notes.xhtml#ch02-fnr2" id="ch02-fn2">2</a></sup>—least of all theology. Our theology must emerge consciously from an investigation of the socioreligious experience of black people, as that experience is reflected in <i>black</i> stories of God's dealings with black people in the struggle of freedom. Tertullian's question, “What…has Athens to do with Jerusalem?”<sup><a href="notes.xhtml#ch02-fnr3" id="ch02-fn3">3</a></sup> is not our central question. His concern was to state the primacy of faith in relation to reason on matters of theological discourse. We have another concern and thus must rephrase that question in the light of our cultural history, asking: “What has <i>Africa</i> to do with Jerusalem, and what difference does Jesus make for African people oppressed in North America?” As Gerard Bissainthe puts it:</p>
<p class="para1">From the despair of our cry,</p>
<p class="para">The heart's intensity,</p>
<p class="para">Out of death and dereliction</p>
<a id="page_16"/>
<p class="para">In the land of our uprootedness,</p>
<p class="para">We shall one day give birth to our Christ,</p>
<p class="para">A Christ made flesh of our flesh,</p>
<p class="para">Our dark flesh of the black people.<sup><a href="notes.xhtml#ch02-fnr4" id="ch02-fn4">4</a></sup></p>
<p class="indent1">If our theological vocation emerges out of the matrix of that vision, then we will not be limited to Euro-American definitions of theology. The ecstasy of the poet's vision and the concreteness of the historical reality from which the vision is created bestow upon us a new perspective, a <i>black</i> perspective that grants free thinking in relation to our cultural history and thus enables us to hear the urgent call to speak the truth. In this context, truth is not an intellectual datum that is entrusted to academic guilds. Truth cannot be separated from the people's struggle and the hopes and dreams that arise from that struggle. Truth is that transcendent reality, disclosed in the people's historical struggle for liberation, which enables them to know that their fight for freedom is not futile. The affirmation of truth means that the freedom hoped for will be realized. Indeed, the freedom hoped for is already partly realized in our present history, because the realization of hope is the very ground of our present struggle. We do not struggle in despair but in hope, not from doubt but from faith, not out of hatred but out of love for ourselves and for humanity. And as black theologians, who have been grasped by the truth, we are accountable to black people.</p>
<p class="indent">What does it mean to speak the truth from a black theological perspective, that is, what are the sources and the content of theology? To explore this question we must begin by exploring the theological function of the black experience.</p>
<p class="head" id="sub1"><b>THE BLACK EXPERIENCE AS A SOURCE OF THEOLOGY</b></p>
<p class="indent1">There is no truth for and about black people that does not emerge out of the context of their experience. Truth in this sense is black truth, a truth disclosed in the history and culture of black people. This means that there can be no Black Theology which does not take the black experience as a source for its starting point. Black Theology is a theology of and for black people, an examination of their stories, tales, and sayings. It is an investigation of the mind into the raw materials of our pilgrimage, telling the story of “how we got over.” For theology to <a id="page_17"/>be black, it must reflect upon what it means to be black. Black Theology must uncover the structures and forms of the black experience, because the categories of interpretation must arise out of the thought forms of the black experience itself.</p>
<p class="indent">What are we to make of the moan and the shout and the call to get on board the gospel train? What must we say about the song, the sermon, the prayer, and the feeling of the Spirit when the people gather for worship and praise to the One they say is “a rock in the weary land, a shelter in a mighty storm, and a stronghold in the day of trouble”?<sup><a href="notes.xhtml#ch02-fnr5" id="ch02-fn5">5</a></sup></p>
<p class="indent">When dealing with the sermon, we must listen to the proclamation of the gospel as disclosed in the black Word. Sometimes the Word is expressed with apocalyptic imagination:</p>
<p class="para1">And now I leave dis thought wid you,</p>
<p class="para">Standing out on de eaves of ether</p>
<p class="para">Breathing clouds from out of his nostrils,</p>
<p class="para">Blowing storms from ’tween his lips</p>
<p class="para">I can see!!</p>
<p class="para">Him seize de mighty axe of his proving power</p>
<p class="para">And smite the stubborn-standing space,</p>
<p class="para">And laid it wide open a mighty gash—</p>
<p class="para">Making a place to hold the world</p>
<p class="para">I can see him—</p>
<p class="para">Molding de world out of thought and power</p>
<p class="para">And whirling it out on its eternal track,</p>
<p class="para">Ah hah, my strong armded God!<sup><a href="notes.xhtml#ch02-fnr6" id="ch02-fn6">6</a></sup></p>
<p class="body-text1">This sermon makes clear that the Word and its proclamation in the black Church is more than the conceptualization of theological doctrine. The Word is more than <i>words</i> about God. God's Word is a poetic happening, an evocation of an indescribable reality in the lives of the people. This is the meaning behind the occasion when a black preacher “who after reading a rather cryptic passage took off his spectacles, closed the Bible with a bang and by way of preface said, ‘Brothers and sisters, this morning—I intend to explain the unexplainable—find out the undefinable—ponder over the imponderable—and unscrew the inscrutable.’ ”<sup><a href="notes.xhtml#ch02-fnr7" id="ch02-fn7">7</a></sup> Here the preacher is not only affirming his freedom in relation to the text; he is also making a sharp distinction between the <i>words</i> of the text and the <a id="page_18"/><i>Word</i> disclosed in the text. Black theologians must also make similar distinctions in using the sermon as a source of theology. They must not be bound to white, academic conceptualizations of the Christian gospel. If the gospel means freedom, then the freedom disclosed in that gospel must also be revealed in the event of proclamation. The preaching of the Word must itself be the embodiment of freedom. When freedom is a constituent of the language itself, then that language refuses to be bound to the limitations of categories not indigenous to its being. Possibilities are thus given for the communication of the Word that transcends intellectual concepts. In black preaching, the Word becomes embodied in the rhythm and the emotions of language as the people respond bodily to the Spirit in their midst. The black sermon arises out of the totality of the people's existence—their pain and joy, trouble and ecstasy.<sup><a href="notes.xhtml#ch02-fnr8" id="ch02-fn8">8</a></sup></p>
<p class="indent">When the Word is spoken as truth and the people feel the presence of truth in the midst of their troublesome situation, they respond to the preached word by ratifying it with resounding “Amens.” The “Amen” is the congregation's witness to, and participation in, the proclamation. It is their Yes that lets the preacher know that he or she is on the “right track,” affirming that they know the truth about what is preached. At this point the Word of truth transcends conceptual analysis and becomes a liberating event wherein the people are moved to another level of existence, and they are permitted to experience a foretaste of the New Jerusalem. Because the participation of the congregation is so crucial for black preaching, the preacher often asks, “Can I get a witness?” or rhetorically says, “I don't believe you are praying with me!” These expressions are the preacher's appeal to the people to let him or her know whether divine truth is being mediated through the proclamation-event. If the people say “Amen,” it is an affirmation that what they hear is a certification of the reality and truthfulness of the proclaimed word. It is the equivalent of “That's right!”</p>
<p class="indent">What was said about the freedom inherent in the sermon can also be said about the prayers of black people. Black prayers are not the same as white prayers. In the black perspective white folks prayed like this:</p>
<p class="blockz">O Lahd, the first thing I want you to understand, is that it is a white man talking to you. This ain't no nigger whooping and hollering for something and then don't know what to do with it after he gets it. This is a white man talking to you, and I want <a id="page_19"/>you to pay some attention. Now, in the first place, Lahd, we would like a little rain. It's been powerful dry around here, and we needs rain mighty bad. But don't come in no storm like you did last year. Come ca'm and gentle and water our crops.</p>
<p class="block_i">And now another thing, Lahd—don't let these niggers be as sassy this coming year as they have been in the past. That's all, Lahd. Amen.<sup><a href="notes.xhtml#ch02-fnr9" id="ch02-fn9">9</a></sup></p>
<p class="indent1">When blacks prayed, they did not accept the religious outlook of the white master. To be sure, the historical situation of slavery may have forced the black person to worship with and “like” the white master, but in many subtle ways the slave transcended the limitations of servitude and affirmed a religious value system that differed from the master's. In response to a white minister, conducting a revival at a black church, “the brother in black” offered this prayer for “his brother in white.”</p>
<p class="block">Oh Lawd, gib him de eye ob de eagle, dat he may spy out sin afar off, weave his hands to the gospel plow, tie his tongue to de limbs ob truth, nail his ear to de South Pole. Bow his head away down between his knees, and his knees way down in some lonesome dark and narrow valley where prayer is much wanted to be made. ’Noint him wid de kerosene oil of salvation and set him on fire.<sup><a href="notes.xhtml#ch02-fnr10" id="ch02-fn10">10</a></sup></p>
<p class="indent1">Sometimes black people in their praying were more direct in their rejection of white people's value system. On one occasion, the white preacher, in his sermon to a black congregation, suggested that “in heaven there must be some Jim Crow partition, with the white saints on one side and the black saints on the other. And after the sermon, when one of the black deacons was called on to pray, he got his chance to reply to this white preacher; for like many praying people, the old black man knew how to talk <i>to</i> the Lord and talk <i>at</i> other people, in the same phrases….” This is what he said:</p>
<p class="block">And, O Lord, we thank thee fer the brother preacher who has spoke to us,—we thank thee for heaven,—we thank thee that we kin all go to heaven,—but as to that partition, O Lord, we thank thee that we'se a shoutin’ people—we thank thee that we kin shout so hard in heaven that we will break down that partition <a id="page_20"/>an’ spread all over heaven,—an’ we thank thee that if the white fokes can't stand it, they can git on out of heaven an’ go to elsewhere!<sup><a href="notes.xhtml#ch02-fnr11" id="ch02-fn11">11</a></sup></p>
<p class="indent1">Here the black theologian should reflect not only upon humor as an artistic expression of black survival but also upon the Word of prayer as disclosed in the affirmation of black identity. God is the Spirit of Jesus that guides and moves the people in their struggle to be what they were created to be. God is their “Captain who never lost a battle.” In prayer, sometimes, God is called the “mighty good leader,” the “dying-bed maker” and the “soul's emancipator.” All these phrases point to God as the living and ever present One who grants freedom for the humiliated and stands in judgment upon oppressors who attempt to destroy black dignity.</p>
<p class="indent">In black prayer the soul is laid bare before the Lord. All pretensions of goodness are rejected before what the people call “the throne of grace.” It was a form of self-criticism not derived from the value system of white people.</p>
<p class="para1z">You heard me when I laid at hell's dark door</p>
<p class="para">With no weapon in my hand</p>
<p class="para">And no God in my heart,</p>
<p class="para">And I cried for three long days and nights.</p>
<p class="para">You heard me, Lawd,</p>
<p class="para">And stooped so low</p>
<p class="para">And snatched me from the hell</p>
<p class="para">Of eternal death and damnation.</p>
<p class="para">You cut loose my stammerin’ tongue;</p>
<p class="para">You established my feet on the rock of Salvation</p>
<p class="para">And yo’ voice was heard in rumblin’ judgment.<sup><a href="notes.xhtml#ch02-fnr12" id="ch02-fn12">12</a></sup></p>
<p class="body-text1">Here is the affirmation of the gift of divine freedom and dignity in the context of religious worship.</p>
<p class="indent">A similar emphasis is found in the song—the spirituals, gospels and other melodious expressions of the people's struggle for freedom.<sup><a href="notes.xhtml#ch02-fnr13" id="ch02-fn13">13</a></sup> The function of the song is to sing the truth as it is lived by the people.</p>
<p class="para1">Who found me when I was lost?</p>
<p class="para">Who helped me to bear my heavy cross?</p>
<a id="page_21"/>
<p class="para">Who fixed me up, turned me ’round,</p>
<p class="para">Left my feet on solid ground?</p>
<p class="para">I know it was Jesus!</p>
<p class="para">I know it was the Lord!</p>
<p class="para1">Who do you think gave sight to the blind?</p>
<p class="para">Made the lame to walk</p>
<p class="para">And dead men rise?</p>
<p class="para">Who took the fishes and the loaves of bread</p>
<p class="para">And made five hundred so all could be fed?</p>
<p class="para">Oh, Jesus, Oh Lord, Jesus! My Lord!</p>
<p class="para">I know it was Jesus! I know it was the Lord!</p>
<p class="indent1">As with the sermon and prayer, the spirituals and gospel songs reveal that the truth of black religion is not limited to the literal meaning of the words. Truth is also disclosed in the movement of the language and the passion created when a song is sung in the right pitch and tonal quality. Truth is found in shout, hum, and moan as these expressions move the people closer to the source of their being. The moan, the shout, and the rhythmic bodily responses to prayer, song, and sermon are artistic projections of the pain and joy experienced in the struggle of freedom. It is the ability of black people to express the tragic side of social existence but also their refusal to be imprisoned by its limitations.</p>
<p class="indent">In these “churchly expressions,” among others, the divine One informs and becomes present in black reality and is best defined in terms of black people's response in body and spirit to that divine source believed to be greater than themselves. If asked the theological question, “Who is God?” one black person might say: “I don't know much about him. All I know is that I was weak and God gave me strength. I was lost and God found me. I was crying and Jesus wiped away the tears from my eyes.” Another might proclaim her testimony in this manner: “God is a heart-fixer and a mind-regulator. God is the One who binds the broken heart and eases the pain of the afflicted. Jesus rescued me from the gates of hell and restored my soul to his bosom.” The key to the theological affirmation here is not only the verbal assent to the power of God to grant identity and liberation to an oppressed and humiliated people. Equally important is the verbal passion with which these affirmations are asserted and the physical responses they elicit from the community in which the testimony is <a id="page_22"/>given. Some will shout, moan, and cry; others will walk, run, and clap their hands. Then there are those who will keep still, using silence as a sign of the presence of God in their midst. This is part of the matrix of Black Theology and the source out of which truth is given.</p>
<p class="indent">However, the black experience as a source of theology is more than the so-called “church experience,” more than singing, praying, and preaching about Jesus, God, and the Holy Spirit. The other side of the black experience should not be rigidly defined as “secular,” if by that term one means the classical Western distinction between secular and sacred, for it is not antireligious or even nonreligious. This side of the black experience is secular only to the extent that it is earthy and seldom uses God or Jesus as the chief symbols of its hopes and dreams. It is sacred because it is created out of the same historical community as the church experience and thus represents the people's attempt to shape life and to live it according to their dreams and aspirations. Included in these black expressions are animal tales, tales of folk figures, slave seculars, blues, and accounts of personal experiences.</p>
<p class="indent">In the animal and folk figure tales, the emphasis is often on the wit and cleverness of the weak in triumph over the strong. The hero of many animal tales is Br'er Rabbit, whose significance is described by J. Mason Brewer.</p>
<p class="block">The role of the rabbit in the tales of the American Negro is similar to that of the hare in African folk narratives—that of the trickster who shrewdly outwits and gains a victory over some physically stronger or more powerful adversary. The animal tales told by Negro slaves with Br'er Rabbit as the hero had a meaning far deeper than mere entertainment. The rabbit actually symbolized the slave himself. Whenever the rabbit succeeded in proving himself smarter than another animal the slave rejoiced secretly, imagining himself smarter than his master.<sup><a href="notes.xhtml#ch02-fnr14" id="ch02-fn14">14</a></sup></p>
<p class="body-text1">With this perspective on rabbit lore, it is understandable why folktales have been described as “hitting a straight lick with a crooked stick.”<sup><a href="notes.xhtml#ch02-fnr15" id="ch02-fn15">15</a></sup> The slave was “putting one over on the white man, in a subtle, and partially disguised way,”<sup><a href="notes.xhtml#ch02-fnr16" id="ch02-fn16">16</a></sup> often singing quietly</p>
<p class="para1">Got one mind for white folks to see</p>
<p class="para">’Nother for what I know is me;</p>
<a id="page_23"/>
<p class="para">He don't know, he don't know my mind,</p>
<p class="para">When he see me laughing</p>
<p class="para">Just laughing to keep from crying.</p>
<p class="indent1">The wry humor of the animal tales is also found in many other stories and sayings, both religious and secular. Humor is an important element in black survival, and it is often related to the theme of freedom. Through humor, black slaves transcended their servitude and affirmed their right to freedom without the risks of revolutionary violence against slave masters. Consider the tale entitled “A Laugh That Meant Freedom,” in which Nehemiah's wit and humor was a means of liberating himself from slavery. The day of freedom came when David Wharton, known as the most cruel slave master in southwest Texas, concluded: “I bet I can make the rascal work.”</p>
<p class="blockz">The morning of the first day after his purchase David Wharton walked over to where Nehemiah was standing and said, “Now you are going to work, you understand. You are going to pick four hundred pounds of cotton today.”</p>
<p class="block_i">“Wal Massa, dat's aw right,” answered Nehemiah, “but ef Ah meks you laff, won’ you lemme off fo’ terday?”</p>
<p class="block_i">“Well,” said David Wharton, who had never been known to laugh, “if you make me laugh, I won't only let you off for today, but I'll give you your freedom.”</p>
<p class="block_i">“Ah decla’, Boss,” said Nehemiah, “yuh sho’ is uh goodlookin’ man.”</p>
<p class="block_i">“I am sorry I can't say the same thing about you,” retorted David Wharton.</p>
<p class="block_i">“Oh, yes, Boss, yuh could,” Nehemiah laughed out, “yuh could, if yuh tole ez big uh lie ez Ah did.”</p>
<p class="block_i">David Wharton could not help laughing at this; he laughed before he thought. Nehemiah got his freedom.<sup><a href="notes.xhtml#ch02-fnr17" id="ch02-fn17">17</a></sup></p>
<p class="indent1">A similar theme of freedom is found in tales about the folk hero, High John the Conqueror.<sup><a href="notes.xhtml#ch02-fnr18" id="ch02-fn18">18</a></sup> He was the “hopebringer,” an expression of the slave's desire to transcend the historical limitations of servitude and the attempt to affirm the “otherness” of existence not defined by the auction block and slave codes. High John, though not identical with Jesus Christ in the spirituals, serves a similar function. He <a id="page_24"/>symbolizes the slaves’ desire for freedom and the recognition that they are not alone in the world. That was why High John was described as “a whisper, a will to hope, a wish to find something worthy of laughter and song.” But the “whisper was put into flesh” and was “sure to be heard when and where the work was the hardest and the lot the most cruel.”<sup><a href="notes.xhtml#ch02-fnr19" id="ch02-fn19">19</a></sup> High John was the slaves’ incarnation of hope, that unbeatable reality deep in the souls of the slaves, enabling them to endure the harsh realities of servitude without losing their dignity. “So they pulled the covers up over their souls and kept them from all hurt, harm and danger….”<sup><a href="notes.xhtml#ch02-fnr20" id="ch02-fn20">20</a></sup></p>
<p class="indent">Unlike Jesus who came from Nazareth and taught in Galilee, High John the Conqueror came from Africa, “walking on the waves of sound,”<sup><a href="notes.xhtml#ch02-fnr21" id="ch02-fn21">21</a></sup> and took flesh in America. Just as Jesus’ birth in Bethlehem took place without the Romans and Jewish religious leaders recognizing his significance, so John came without slave masters knowing the meaning of his appearance. The “Messianic secret” so dominant in Mark's portrayal of Jesus is also present in the tales about John. While the slaves knew who he was, the white masters did not perceive that they were not dealing with an ordinary slave. And perhaps the significance of John was best described by Aunt Sutton when she said John meant power,<sup><a href="notes.xhtml#ch02-fnr22" id="ch02-fn22">22</a></sup> the power of the slaves to hold themselves together in struggle.</p>
<p class="indent">In the slave seculars and blues is revealed another black expression in song.<sup><a href="notes.xhtml#ch02-fnr23" id="ch02-fn23">23</a></sup> In contrast to the spirituals and gospels, God is not the subject of these songs. The seculars and blues deal with the concreteness of life's contradictions without reference to a divine reality as a source of strength. What are we to make of this expression of truth?</p>
<p class="para1">I'll eat when I'm hungry</p>
<p class="para">An’ I’ drink when I'se dry;</p>
<p class="para">An’ if de whitefolks don't kill me,</p>
<p class="para">I'll live till I die.</p>
<p class="body-text1">The seculars deal with the absurdity of existence without using Jesus Christ as their central focal point. There is hope and transcendence but only as the vision is created from life itself.</p>
<p class="indent">The same this-worldly emphasis is found in the blues. “The blues ain't nothin’ but a poor man's heart disease.” With that affirmation <a id="page_25"/>the singer establishes an existential contact with his audience and blows the blues to the rhythm of life as lived by those who had so little to show for living—nothing except themselves. It is not that they denied God; they simply did not use God as a symbol of victory over suffering and pain. Their theme is endurance and transcendence in the face of despair.</p>
<p class="para1">House catch on fire</p>
<p class="para">And ain't no water around,</p>
<p class="para">If your house catch on fire,</p>
<p class="para">Ain't no water around,</p>
<p class="para">Throw yourself out the window,</p>
<p class="para">Let it burn on down.</p>
<p class="body-text1">The blues deal with areas of bodily expression and desire that were only indirectly touched in church music. They deal openly with sex, love, and agony when a man loses his woman.</p>
<p class="para1">How long, baby, how long</p>
<p class="para">Has that even’ train been gone?</p>
<p class="para">How long? How long? I say, How long?</p>
<p class="para">Standin’ at the station watchin’ my baby leave town,</p>
<p class="para">Sure am disgusted—for where could she be gone—</p>
<p class="para">For how long? How long? I say, How long?</p>
<p class="body-text1">And when a woman cannot find her man,</p>
<p class="para1">The man I'll marry ain't born yet,</p>
<p class="para">An’ his mammy's dead.</p>
<p class="body-text1">In the blues, black people sing about the tragic side of life and use the artistic expression of tragedy as the means for transcending it.</p>
<p class="para1">Ef you ever been down, you know jes how I feel—</p>
<p class="para">Lak a broken-down engine got no drivin’ wheel,</p>
<p class="para">Lak a po’ sojer boy lef’ on de battle-fiel.</p>
<p class="indent1">Another important theological source of the black experience is the narratives of slaves and ex-slaves, the personal accounts of black <a id="page_26"/>people's triumph and defeats.<sup><a href="notes.xhtml#ch02-fnr24" id="ch02-fn24">24</a></sup> Here are found many dimensions of the black experience as told by those who lived it in the midst of servitude and oppression. There are slaves who might be described as “religious,” and others who are indifferent toward “religion.” There are slaves who praise their masters for “kind” treatment; and those who say: “I had much rather starve in England, a free woman than be a slave for the best man that ever breathed upon the American continent.”<sup><a href="notes.xhtml#ch02-fnr25" id="ch02-fn25">25</a></sup> This is the stuff of the black experience which makes Black Theology possible and necessary.</p>
<p class="indent">More recent black literature is another expression of the black experience. Particularly notable are the poets of the Harlem Renaissance (1920s and 1930s) and their successors. In the midst of the destruction of black dignity, Claude McKay articulated a poetic vision of black people's strivings for freedom.</p>
<p class="para1">If we must die, let it not be like hogs,</p>
<p class="para">Hunted and penned in an inglorious spot,</p>
<p class="para">While all around us bark the mad and hungry dogs,</p>
<p class="para">Making their mock at our accursed lot.<sup><a href="notes.xhtml#ch02-fnr26" id="ch02-fn26">26</a></sup></p>
<p class="body-text1">Like many black artists of that period, he recognized that art is never for its own sake but for people's sake. Black art is black people creating values based on their own experience and affirming the willingness to invent new definitions and life-styles commensurate with their struggle to be free. That was why Claude McKay said: “If we must die, O let us nobly die.”<sup><a href="notes.xhtml#ch02-fnr27" id="ch02-fn27">27</a></sup></p>
<p class="indent">The affirmation of <i>blackness</i> as an essential ingredient in the definition of humanity has never been easy in <i>white</i> America. But to believe in the <i>divine</i> in the context of black suffering can often place a curious burden upon a poet. As Countee Cullen put it:</p>
<p class="para1">Yet do I marvel at this curious thing:</p>
<p class="para">To make a poet black and bid him sing!<sup><a href="notes.xhtml#ch02-fnr28" id="ch02-fn28">28</a></sup></p>
<p class="body-text1">What shall a black poet sing? What is the role of the black thinker in a society where black people sing</p>
<p class="para1">I wish I knew how it would feel to be free</p>
<p class="para">I wish I could break all the chains holdin’ me?<sup><a href="notes.xhtml#ch02-fnr29" id="ch02-fn29">29</a></sup></p>
<a id="page_27"/>
<p class="body-text1">The artists of the Harlem Renaissance did not exhaust the fullest depths of that question. The black artists of the 1960s and 70s, who were influenced by the new black consciousness as defined in the context of the black power revolution, usually took their cue from Imamu Amiri Baraka:</p>
<p class="block">The Black Artist's role in America is to aid in the destruction of America as he knows it. His role is to report and reflect so precisely the nature of the society, and of himself in that society, that other men will be moved by the exactness of his rendering and, if they are black men, grow strong through this moving, having seen their own strength, and weakness; and if they are white men, tremble, curse, and go mad, because they will be drenched with the filth of their evil.<sup><a href="notes.xhtml#ch02-fnr30" id="ch02-fn30">30</a></sup></p>
<p class="indent1">To summarize: the folklore of black people centers on the ability of the weak to survive through cunning, trickery, and sheer deception in an environment of the strong and powerful. Br'er Rabbit tricked Br'er Fox into throwing him into the brier-patch and hollered out: “Bred en bawn in a brier-patch, Br'er Fox—bred en bawn in a brier-patch!”<sup><a href="notes.xhtml#ch02-fnr31" id="ch02-fn31">31</a></sup> High John the Conquerer outwits the master and another slave survives. This same theme of survival and liberation is found in sermon, prayer, and song—including seculars, spirituals, and blues. On the one hand, there is the theological emphasis that God will liberate the weak from the injustice of the strong:</p>
<p class="para1">When Israel was in Egypt's land,</p>
<p class="para">Let my people go;</p>
<p class="para">Oppressed so hard they could not stand,</p>
<p class="para">Let my people go;</p>
<p class="para">Go down Moses, ’way down in Egypt's land.</p>
<p class="para">Tell ole Pharaoh</p>
<p class="para">Let my people go.</p>
<p class="body-text1">On the other hand, transcendence over historical negations was affirmed through the recognition that</p>
<p class="para1">De big bee flies high</p>
<p class="para2">De little bee makes the honey</p>
<a id="page_28"/>
<p class="para">De black man raised the cotton,</p>
<p class="para2">An’ de white man gets de money.</p>
<p class="body-text1">But in both cases, black people expressed the contradictions of existence while affirming the need to live in history without being conquered by it. The whole of black expression, Christian and non-Christian, preacher and poet, deals with the theme of liberation and the transcendence that happens in struggle.</p>
<p class="indent">It is the encounter of the truth of black experience that enables black theologians to know that they must speak the truth to the people. To speak the truth to black people is to relate the story of our mothers’ and fathers’ struggles to our present struggles and thereby create a humane future for our children. We must take the speeches and tales, the blues and the spirituals, the prayers and the sermons of black people and incorporate them into our present existence, relating our parents’ strivings to our daily fight to survive in a land defined by George Washington, Thomas Jefferson, and Richard Nixon. Indeed our survival and liberation depend upon our recognition of the truth when it is spoken and lived by the people. If we cannot recognize the truth, then it cannot liberate us from untruth. To know the truth is to appropriate it, for it is not mainly reflection and theory. Truth is divine action entering into our lives and creating the human action of liberation. Truth enables us to dance and live to the rhythm of freedom in our lives as we struggle to be who we are. Therefore, to <i>speak</i> the truth we black theologians must set forth the authentic experience of blackness. We must respond to the urgent call of sister Desirée Barnwell:</p>
<p class="para1">Will the real black people please stand:</p>
<p class="para">Those fearless in the unconventional,</p>
<p class="para">Moved towards their own blackness,</p>
<p class="para">Prone to influence and set trends,</p>
<p class="para">Schooled in <i>their</i> times and folkways,</p>
<p class="para">Dedicated to worthwhile endeavors,</p>
<p class="para">Attentive to meaningful expressions.<sup><a href="notes.xhtml#ch02-fnr32" id="ch02-fn32">32</a></sup></p>
<p class="head" id="sub2"><b>BLACK EXPERIENCE, SCRIPTURE, AND JESUS CHRIST</b></p>
<p class="indent1">The question inevitably arises, What is the relation of the black experience as a source of Black Theology to the Bible, which is <a id="page_29"/>traditionally identified as the source of Christian theology? The connection is this. When black people sing, preach, and tell stories about their struggle, one fact is clear: they are not dealing simply with themselves. They are talking about another reality, “so high you can't get over him, so low you can't get under him, so wide you can't get around him.” It is this affirmation of transcendence that prevents Black Theology from being reduced merely to the cultural history of black people. For black people the transcendent reality is none other than Jesus Christ, of whom Scripture speaks. The Bible is the witness to God's self-disclosure in Jesus Christ. Thus the black experience requires that Scripture be a source of Black Theology. For it was Scripture that enabled slaves to affirm a view of God that differed radically from that of the slave masters. The slave masters’ intention was to present a “Jesus” who would make the slave obedient and docile. Jesus was supposed to make black people better slaves, that is, faithful servants of white masters. But many blacks rejected that view of Jesus not only because it contradicted their African heritage, but because it contradicted the witness of Scripture. That was why Richard Allen and his companions walked out of St. George Methodist Episcopal Church in 1787 as a prophetic protest against segregated worship.<sup><a href="notes.xhtml#ch02-fnr33" id="ch02-fn33">33</a></sup> The same was true for Henry Highland Garnet. Through the reading of Scripture he concluded that liberty was a gift from God, and therefore black slaves ought to use any available means that promises success in the attainment of freedom.<sup><a href="notes.xhtml#ch02-fnr34" id="ch02-fn34">34</a></sup> Throughout black history Scripture was used for a definition of God and Jesus that was consistent with the black struggle for liberation. Further examples are found in Henry M. Turner's affirmation that “God is a Negro,” Howard Thurman's association of Jesus with the disinherited, and Martin Luther King, Jr.'s, view that political struggle was consistent with the gospel of Jesus.<sup><a href="notes.xhtml#ch02-fnr35" id="ch02-fn35">35</a></sup> Scripture established limits to white people's use of Jesus Christ as a confirmation of black oppression.</p>
<p class="indent">The importance of Scripture as the witness to Jesus Christ does not mean that Black Theology can therefore ignore the tradition and history of Western Christianity. It only means that our study of that tradition must be done in the light of the Truth disclosed in Scripture as interpreted by black people. Although we recognize the interrelationship of Scripture and tradition, especially in the early centuries of the Church, yet the full meaning of Scripture is not limited to the <a id="page_30"/>interpretation of it as given in that particular tradition. Indeed Scripture and tradition often contradict each other. As the meaning of Jesus Christ is not to be identified with the <i>words</i> of Scripture, so the meaning of Scripture as the witness to the Word is not defined exclusively by Cyprian, Anselm, and Thomas. As theologians, we must interpret the latter in the light of the former.</p>
<p class="indent">On the one hand, we must evaluate a given interpreter of Scripture in the light of the <i>particularity</i> of his or her history, refusing to use the relativity of our present as the norm for the investigation of the past. We cannot criticize the early Church Fathers for their failure to address the critical questions of our contemporary situation. They are accountable only for dealing with the historical issues in their time as they relate to Jesus’ presence among them. On the other hand, there are common elements in human experience that enable us to evaluate past interpreters of the faith. Since oppression of the weak by the powerful is one of those elements, we can put the critical question to Athanasius, Augustine, or Luther: What has the gospel of Jesus, as witnessed in Scripture, to do with the humiliated and the abused? If they failed to ask that question or only made it secondary in their interpretation of the gospel, then it is our task to make clear how their approach to the gospel differs from Scripture. This creates the possibility of distinguishing valid theology from heresy, a matter to be discussed later in this chapter.</p>
<p class="indent">Having described the two sources of Black Theology (black experience and Scripture), it is now important to distinguish both sources from their subject or essence, which is Jesus Christ. The subject of theology is that which creates the precise character of theological language, thereby distinguishing it from other ways of speaking. By contrast, the sources of theology are the materials that make possible a valid articulation of theology's subject.</p>
<p class="indent">Jesus Christ is the subject of Black Theology because he is the content of the hopes and dreams of black people. He was chosen by our grandparents, who saw in his liberating presence that he had chosen them and thus became the foundation of their struggle for freedom.<sup><a href="notes.xhtml#ch02-fnr36" id="ch02-fn36">36</a></sup> He was their Truth, enabling them to know that white definitions of black humanity were lies. When their way became twisted and senseless, they told Jesus about it. He lifted their burdens and eased their pain, thereby bestowing upon them a vision of freedom that transcended historical limitations. That was why they sang:</p>
<a id="page_31"/>
<p class="para1">Sometimes I hangs my head an’ cries,</p>
<p class="para">But Jesus goin’ to wipe my weepin’ eyes.</p>
<p class="indent1">Of course, for some people who live in this modern, scientific age with its emphasis on unlimited human possibilities, such a faith sounds simplistic and childish. But that is because their consciousness is defined by masters and rulers who really believe that they know what is best for everybody. However, the victims of such attitudes have only two alternatives: (1) to accept the oppressor's value system and thus be contented with the place set for them by others, or (2) to find a completely new way of looking at reality that enables them to fight against oppression. Many black slaves chose the latter, using Jesus Christ as the basis of their struggle. Through Jesus Christ they could know that they were <i>people</i>, even though they were bought and sold like cattle. Jesus Christ was that reality who invaded their history from beyond and bestowed upon them a definition of humanity that could not be destroyed by the whip and the pistol.</p>
<p class="indent">The emphasis on Jesus Christ and Scripture as the subject and source of the presence of transcendence in black experience raises the question of the precise relationship between them. Some of my critics have stated the issue in this manner. “On page 32 of <i>Black Theology and Black Power</i>, quoting Ron Karenga, you said that ‘The fact that I am Black is my ultimate reality.’ But then on page 34 of the same book, you wrote that ‘Christianity begins and ends with the man Jesus—his life, death and resurrection.’ Which do you <i>really</i> mean? Blackness or Jesus Christ? You cannot have it both ways.”</p>
<p class="indent">This is an important matter, and perhaps the place to begin for clarification is to state emphatically that, like Scripture, the black experience is a <i>source</i> of the Truth but not the Truth itself. Jesus Christ is the Truth and thus stands in judgment over all statements about truth. But having said that, we must immediately balance it with another statement, without which the first statement falsifies what it intends to affirm. We must state the other side of the paradox emphatically: There is no truth in Jesus Christ independent of the oppressed of the land—their history and culture. And in America, the oppressed are the people of color—black, yellow, red, and brown. Indeed it can be said that to know Jesus is to know him as revealed in the struggle of the oppressed for freedom. Their struggle is Jesus’ <a id="page_32"/>struggle, and he is thus revealed in the particularity of their cultural history—their hopes and dreams of freedom.</p>
<p class="indent">The difficulty some people have in understanding the relation between Jesus and the black experience in Black Theology is due partly to their inability to appreciate the dialectical character of theological speech, especially when related to the black struggle for liberation. They use a dialectical model when dealing with such things as divinity and humanity in Jesus Christ or justification and sanctification in St. Paul or John Wesley. But there is a failure of nerve when their abstractions about Jesus are applied to the historical present. Jesus Christ is not a proposition, not a theological concept which exists merely in our heads. He is an event of liberation, a happening in the lives of oppressed people struggling for political freedom. Therefore, to know him is to encounter him in the history of the weak and the helpless. That is why it can be rightly said that there can be no knowledge of Jesus independent of the history and culture of the oppressed. It is impossible to interpret the Scripture correctly and thus understand Jesus aright unless the interpretation is done in the light of the consciousness of the oppressed in their struggle for liberation.</p>
<p class="indent">A similar convergence occurs when it is asked whether the black experience exists independently of Jesus Christ. If by Jesus Christ is meant the formal preaching and teaching of white missionaries, at a particular point in time, then the answer is an unqualified Yes. As we must say that Jesus’ existence in himself is not a product of culture, so the black experience began before black people were introduced to Christianity. However, that is such an obvious historical fact that we need not debate it further. But if by Jesus Christ is meant “the image of the invisible God, the first-born of all creation, for in him all things were created in heaven and on earth, visible and invisible” (Col. 1:15–16 <small>RSV</small>), then the answer is an unqualified No. In this context, Jesus is not simply a doctrine or even a particular event limited by time. He is the eternal event of liberation in the divine person who makes freedom a constituent of human existence. There is no existence apart from him because he is the ground of existence without whom nothing is. Therefore, where human beings struggle for freedom and refuse to be defined by unauthorized earthly authorities, there Jesus Christ is present among them. His presence is the sustaining and liberating event in the lives of the oppressed that makes possible the continued struggle for freedom.</p>
<a id="page_33"/>
<p class="indent">From the context of the eternal presence of Christ, the Liberator, emerges the interdependence of Jesus and the black experience as expressed in the lives of many black people. This interdependence is expressed so forcefully and concretely that <i>truly</i> to speak of the black experience is to speak of Jesus. He is the Word in their lives, and thus to speak of their experience as it is manifested in the joys and sorrows of black life is to speak of the One they say is the Comforter in time of trouble, “the lily of the valley,” and “the bright and morning star.”</p>
<p class="para" style="padding-top:15px;">He's King of Kings, and Lord of Lords,</p>
<p class="para">Jesus Christ, the first and the last</p>
<p class="para">No man works like him.</p>
<p class="body-text" style="padding-top:15px;">Others have testified that he is a “bridge over troubled waters,” the “One who has been better to us than we have been to ourselves.” In <i>God Struck Me Dead</i>, a collection of conversion experiences and autobiographies of ex-slaves, one called him a “time-God”! “He don't come before time; he don't come after time. He comes just on time.”<sup><a href="notes.xhtml#ch02-fnr37" id="ch02-fn37">37</a></sup> And he comes as the preserver of the weak in time of trouble and as the sustaining Spirit of freedom in wretched places. This encounter of Jesus as the Christ of God makes his reality an eternal presence of liberation before and after the slave ships and Middle Passage.</p>
<p class="indent">The convergence of Jesus Christ and the black experience is the meaning of the Incarnation. Because God became human in Jesus Christ, God disclosed the divine will to be with humanity in our wretchedness. And because we blacks accept God's presence in Jesus as the true definition of our humanity, blackness and divinity are dialectically bound together as one reality. This is the theological meaning of the paradoxical assertion about the primacy of the black experience and Jesus Christ as witnessed in Scripture.<sup><a href="notes.xhtml#ch02-fnr38" id="ch02-fn38">38</a></sup></p>
<p class="indent2">This brings us to the issue of heresy, which is an important matter if the Church intends to be clear about its message and its vocation in the world. Heresy here refers to any activity or teaching that contradicts the liberating truth of Jesus Christ. It is an action that denies the Lordship of Christ or a word that refuses to acknowledge his liberating presence in the struggle for freedom. Heresy is the refusal to speak the truth or to live the truth in the light of the One who is the Truth.</p>
<p class="indent">The early Church was correct in identifying problems of heresy as a critical theological issue, although it was often itself the heretic. But <a id="page_34"/>every community that is serious about the gospel of Jesus Christ must ask, When does the Church cease to be the Church of Jesus Christ? When do the Church's actions deny the faith that it verbalizes? These questions must be answered for every given situation, if the people of God are to remain relatively clearheaded about the relation between their existence as God's people and Jesus’ existence as their Lord. Not every church that claims to be the Church is the Church, because being the Church requires concrete commitments to the One who is the essence of the Church. Not every theology that claims to be Christian is Christian, because the doing of Christian theology requires specific commitments to the One who is the content of that reality to which the word “Christian” points.</p>
<p class="indent">The question of heresy must be reopened in our time, <i>not</i> for the purpose of witch-hunting, but for the sake of the Church's life. We need to be clear about the subject to which our proclamation points and the relation of our words about that Subject to our <i>actions</i> in the world. Here it must be emphasized that we are not simply concerned with our theological conceptualizations of Jesus Christ, although they are included. Theological concepts have meaning only as they are translated into theological praxis, that is, the Church living in the world on the basis of what it proclaims. This means that theology and ethics, though not identical, are closely interrelated: the mission of the Church is defined by its proclamation, and the proclamation is authenticated by the mission. For the sake of the mission of the Church in the world, we must continually ask, What actions deny the Truth disclosed in Jesus Christ? Where should the line be drawn? Can the Church of Jesus Christ be racist and Christian at the same time? Can the Church of Jesus Christ be politically, socially, and economically identified with the structures of oppression and also be a servant of Christ? Can the Church of Jesus Christ fail to make the liberation of the poor the center of its message and work, and still remain faithful to its Lord?</p>
<p class="indent">On the level of theory these questions are easy to answer. Yet they are very difficult to answer in the day-to-day life of the Church. This difficulty is increased because we live in a society of many denominations under an ethos of the “freedom” of religion. But difficulties do not make the questions less important. Indeed their importance is grounded in the integrity of our faith and the obedience that is inherent in the reality of Jesus Christ. The answer to the question <a id="page_35"/>of heresy as it relates both to our past and to our present situation begins and ends with the centrality of Jesus Christ as the Liberator of the oppressed. Any interpretation of the gospel in any historical period that fails to see Jesus as the Liberator of the oppressed is heretical. Any view of the gospel that fails to understand the Church as that community whose work and consciousness are defined by the community of the oppressed is not Christian and is thus heretical. Within this context the issue of heresy must be debated.</p>
<p class="indent">It is true that identifying the liberation of the oppressed as crucial to the authenticity of the gospel could be interpreted as accidental to my historical situation. I admit readily that the social context of my existence plays an important role in my understanding of the gospel message. However, it would be ridiculous to claim that there is some secret language by which Africans could be persuaded by what I say while non-Africans could never understand it. Clearly there is a basis for speaking across cultural lines, namely, the Bible. Looking at the message of Scripture exegetically, we ask: Does the Bible in fact center upon the proclamation of the liberation of the oppressed? I have shown on other occasions that the message of Scripture is the proclamation and record of God's liberation, and I will speak of this again in later chapters. Indeed it is the encounter of this truth of Scripture that enables us black theologians to know that we must</p>
<p class="para1">Speak the Truth to the people</p>
<p class="para">To identify the enemy is to free the mind</p>
<p class="para">Free the mind of the people</p>
<p class="para">Speak to the mind of the people</p>
<p class="para">Speak Truth.<sup><a href="notes.xhtml#ch02-fnr39" id="ch02-fn39">39</a></sup></p>
</div>
</body>
</html>