<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>copyright</title>
<link href="ebook_style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
<meta content="urn:uuid:5bf1d25e-4978-4604-b0f7-22d24fac0880" name="Adept.expected.resource"/>
</head>
<body>
<div>
<a id="page_4"/>
<p class="copyz">The Catholic Foreign Mission Society of America (Maryknoll) recruits and trains people for overseas missionary service. Through Orbis Books, Maryknoll aims to foster the international dialogue that is essential to mission. The books published, however, reflect the opinions of their authors and are not meant to represent the official position of the society.</p>
<hr style="margin-top:15px; margin-bottom:15px;"/>
<p class="copy">Originally published in 1975 by Seabury Press, Inc.</p>
<p class="copy">New revised edition © 1997 by James H. Cone</p>
<p class="copy">This edition published by Orbis Books, Maryknoll, NY 10545-0308.</p>
<p class="copy">Twenty-second Printing, June 2018</p>
<p class="copy">All rights reserved.</p>
<p class="copyz1">Grateful acknowledgment is made to the following for permission to reprint sections from copyrighted material: Harold Ober Associates, Inc. for Langston Hughes, “A New Song,” in <i>Opportunity</i> 1933, © 1938 by Langston Hughes. Mari Evans, for Mari Evans, “The Insurgent,” “Speak the Truth to the People,” “I Am a Black Woman,” and “Who Can Be Born Black,” in <i>I Am a Black Woman</i>, Wm. Morrow and Company, 1970. Twayne Publishers, Inc., for Claude McKay, “If We Must Die,” in <i>Selected Poems of Claude McKay</i>, copyright © 1953 Bookman Associates, Inc. Cover art “Black Crucifixion” by Fritz Eichenberg (1963) copyright © 1997 Fritz Eichenberg Trust/Licensed by VAGA, New York, NY.</p>
<p class="copyz2">No part of this publication may be reproduced or transmitted in any form or by any means, electronic or mechanical, including photocopying, recording, or any information storage or retrieval system, without prior permission in writing from the publishers.</p>
<p class="copyz2">Queries regarding rights and permissions should be addressed to: Orbis Books, P.O. Box 308, Maryknoll, NY 10545-0308</p>
<p class="copyz2">Manufactured in the United States of America</p>
<hr style="margin-top:12px; margin-bottom:17px;"/>
<p class="copy"><b>Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data</b></p>
<p class="copyz3">Cone, James H.</p>
<p class="copyz4">God of the oppressed / James H. Cone.—Rev. ed.</p>
<p class="copyz4">     p.    cm.</p>
<p class="copyz4">ISBN 1-57075-158-7 (alk. paper)</p>
<p class="copyz4">1. Liberation theology.     2. Afro-Americans—Religion.</p>
<table cellpadding="0" cellspacing="0" class="tab" width="100%">
<col width="80%"/>
<col width="20%"/>
<tr>
<td style="padding-left:10px;" valign="top">3. Theology.      I.    Title.</td>
<td style="padding-left:10px;" valign="top"> </td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="padding-left:10px;" valign="top">BT83.57.C67      1997</td>
<td style="padding-left:10px;" valign="top">97-30468</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="padding-left:10px;" valign="top">261.8′34896073—dc21</td>
<td style="padding-left:30px;" valign="top">CIP</td>
</tr>
</table>
</div>
</body>
</html>