<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>notes</title>
<link href="ebook_style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
<meta content="urn:uuid:5bf1d25e-4978-4604-b0f7-22d24fac0880" name="Adept.expected.resource"/>
</head>
<body>
<div>
<a id="page_227"/>
<h2 class="chap_tit2">Notes</h2>
<p class="head_n"><b>Preface to the 1997 Edition</b></p>
<p class="notesz"><sup><a href="preface.xhtml#pre-fn1" id="pre-fnr1">1</a></sup>See Phyllis Trible, <i>Texts of Terror: Literary-Feminist Readings of Biblical Narratives</i> (Philadelphia: Fortress, 1984).</p>
<p class="notesz"><sup><a href="preface.xhtml#pre-fn2" id="pre-fnr2">2</a></sup>Mieke Bal, <i>On Story-Telling: Essays in Narratology</i>, David Jobling (ed.) (Sonoma, Calif.: Polebridge, 1991), p. 14.</p>
<p class="notesz"><sup><a href="preface.xhtml#pre-fn3" id="pre-fnr3">3</a></sup>J. Michael Clark, “Confessions of Scripture-Phobia, or, Why I Don't Use the Bible in My Theology.” Paper presented at the annual meeting of the Society of Biblical Literature\American Academy of Religion, Nov. 21–24, 1992.</p>
<p class="notesz"><sup><a href="preface.xhtml#pre-fn4" id="pre-fnr4">4</a></sup>Gary David Comstock, <i>Gay Theology without Apology</i> (Cleveland: Pilgrim, 1993), p. 39.</p>
<p class="notesz"><sup><a href="preface.xhtml#pre-fn5" id="pre-fnr5">5</a></sup>See Delores S. Williams, <i>Sisters in the Wilderness: The Challenge of Womanist God-Talk</i> (Maryknoll, N.Y.: Orbis, 1993); Robert A. Warrior, “Canaanites and Conquerors: Deliverance, Conquest, and Liberation Theology Today,” <i>Christianity and Crisis</i>, v. 49, n.12, 9/11/1989, pp. 261–265; Itumeleng J. Mosala, <i>Biblical Hermeneutics and Black Theology in South Africa</i> (Grand Rapids: Eerdmans, 1989).</p>
<p class="notesz"><sup><a href="preface.xhtml#pre-fn6" id="pre-fnr6">6</a></sup>See Delores Williams, “Black Women's Surrogacy Experience and the Christian Notion of Redemption” in <i>After Patriarchy: Feminist Transformations of the World Religions</i>, Paula Cooey, William Eakin, and Jay McDaniel (eds.) (Maryknoll, N.Y.: Orbis Books, 1991), pp. 1–14; Joanne Brown/Rebecca Parker, “For God So Loved the World?” in <i>Christianity, Patriarchy, and Abuse: A Feminist Critique</i>, Joanne Carlson Brown &amp; Carole R. Bohn (eds.) (New York: Pilgrim Press, 1990), pp. 1–30; Rita Nakashima Brock, “And A Little Child Will Lead Us: Christology and Child Abuse” in ibid., pp. 42–61.</p>
<p class="head_n" style="padding-top:5px;"><b>1. Introduction</b></p>
<p class="notesz"><a href="chapter01.xhtml#ch01-fn1" id="ch01-fnr1">1</a>. Richard Wright, <i>White Man Listen!</i> (New York: Doubleday 1964), p. 83.</p>
<p class="notesz"><a href="chapter01.xhtml#ch01-fn2" id="ch01-fnr2">2</a>. Paul Holmer, “Remarks Excerpted from ‘The Crisis in Rhetoric,’ ” in <i>Theological Education</i>, Vol. VII, No. 3 (Spring 1971), p. 211. See also an <a id="page_228"/>important reply to Holmer by Charles S. Rooks in the same issue, “Response to Paul Holmer,” pp. 215–218.</p>
<p class="notesz"><a href="chapter01.xhtml#ch01-fn3" id="ch01-fnr3">3</a>. Abraham Heschel, <i>The Prophets</i>, Vol. I (New York: Harper Torchbooks, 1969), p. xiv.</p>
<p class="notesz"><a href="chapter01.xhtml#ch01-fn4" id="ch01-fnr4">4</a>. Feuerbach, cited in Herbert Marcuse, <i>Reason and Revolution</i> (Boston: Beacon Press, 1960), p. 270</p>
<p class="notesz"><a href="chapter01.xhtml#ch01-fn5" id="ch01-fnr5">5</a>. Karl Marx and Friedrich Engels, <i>On Religion</i> (New York: Shocken Books, 1964), pp. 74–75.</p>
<p class="notesz"><a href="chapter01.xhtml#ch01-fn6" id="ch01-fnr6">6</a>. Cassandra, cited in H. A. Baker, Jr., <i>Long Black Song</i> (Charlottesville: University of Virginia Press, 1972), p. 116.</p>
<p class="head_n0"><b>2. Speaking the Truth</b></p>
<p class="notesz"><a href="chapter02.xhtml#ch02-fn1" id="ch02-fnr1">1</a>. Mari Evans, <i>I Am a Black Woman</i> (New York: William Morrow, 1970), p. 91.</p>
<p class="notesz"><a href="chapter02.xhtml#ch02-fn2" id="ch02-fnr2">2</a>. Baraka, cited in Don L. Lee, <i>Dynamite Voices</i>, Vol. I (Detroit: Broadside Press, 1971), p. 14. Baraka's concern was to critique the so-called “objectivity” in poetry and other art forms. The same critique applies to other human expressions, especially theology.</p>
<p class="notesz"><a href="chapter02.xhtml#ch02-fn3" id="ch02-fnr3">3</a>. Tertullian, “On Prescription against Heretics,” in <i>The Ante-Nicene Fathers</i>, Vol. III, ed. A. Roberts and J. Donaldson (Grand Rapids, Mich.: Wm. B. Eerdmans, 1951), p. 246.</p>
<p class="notesz"><a href="chapter02.xhtml#ch02-fn4" id="ch02-fnr4">4</a>. Bissainthe, cited in John V. Taylor, <i>The Primal Vision</i> (London: SCM Press, 1963), p. 16.</p>
<p class="notesz"><a href="chapter02.xhtml#ch02-fn5" id="ch02-fnr5">5</a>. Cited in J. Mason Brewer, <i>American Negro Folklore</i> (Chicago: Quadrangle Books, 1968), p. 140.</p>
<p class="notesz"><a href="chapter02.xhtml#ch02-fn6" id="ch02-fnr6">6</a>. Cited in Langston Hughes and Arna Bontemps (eds.), <i>Book of Negro Folklore</i> (New York: Dodd, Mead, 1958), pp. 234–235. This is an excellent collection of sermons, prayers, songs, and other folkloric material. Perhaps the earliest and the best study of old-time black preaching is William H. Pipes, <i>Say Amen, Brother</i>! (Westport, Conn.: Negro Universities Press, 1970; originally published in 1951). See also James W. Johnson's excellent book, <i>God's Trombones</i> (New York: Viking Press, 1927). Another excellent study and collection of folkloric material in general and sermons in particular is J. Mason Brewer, <i>American Negro Folklore</i>. See also Bruce A. Rosenberg, <i>The Art of the American Folk Preacher</i> (New York: Oxford University Press, 1970); Henry H. Mitchell, <i>Black Preaching</i> (Philadelphia: Lippincott, 1970). However, the best introduction to the black sermon is through the black preacher at a black church on any given Sunday morning. Failing that possibility, I would recommend the recordings of the Rev. C. L. Franklin, who perhaps represents in his tradition what his daughter, Aretha, represents in hers. He has recorded more than fifty sermons at New Bethel Baptist Church in Detroit and they are available on Chess long-playing records. For a listing of these sermons, see his <a id="page_229"/>album, “The Inner Conflict,” sermon No. 43, Chess Producing Corporation, 320 East 21st St., Chicago, Ill. For other black sermons, see the Rev. Clay Evans's “A Foolish Sale”; Evans, from whom the records are available, is pastor of the Fellowship Baptist Church, Chicago, Ill., 45th Place and Princeton Ave.; see also the sermons by the Rev. George A. Weaver, Witnessing Recording Agency, Kansas City, Kan.; Weaver is pastor of New Mt. Olive Baptist Church, Fort Lauderdale, Fla.; and by Rev. C. A. W. Clark, pastor of Good Street Baptist Church, Dallas, Tex., Witnessing Recording Agency.</p>
<p class="notesz"><a href="chapter02.xhtml#ch02-fn7" id="ch02-fnr7">7</a>. James W. Johnson, <i>God's Trombones</i>, pp. 4–5.</p>
<p class="notesz"><a href="chapter02.xhtml#ch02-fn8" id="ch02-fnr8">8</a>. Some interpreters have misunderstood the black preacher because of the limitations of their conceptual tools of evaluation. I have reference to Bruce Rosenberg's <i>The Art of the American Folk Preacher</i>. The importance of this book is perhaps limited to its inclusion of valuable texts of sermons. From my viewpoint and concern, the chief defect of this work was Rosenberg's failure to take seriously, as an <i>interpretive tool</i>, the socioreligious consciousness of the preachers under investigation.</p>
<p class="notesz"><a href="chapter02.xhtml#ch02-fn9" id="ch02-fnr9">9</a>. Cited in J. Mason Brewer, <i>American Negro Folklore</i>, p. 139.</p>
<p class="notesz1"><a href="chapter02.xhtml#ch02-fn10" id="ch02-fnr10">10</a>. Ibid., p. 140. Like the sermon, the best source for black prayers is the black church on a given Sunday morning or a Wednesday night prayer service. The next best sources are the recordings found in many sermon albums. See the Rev. C. L. Franklin, “Rev. C. L. Franklin Sings,” LP-33, Chess Producing Corporation. Written prayers are found in Hughes and Bontemps, <i>Negro Folklore</i>; J. W. Johnson, <i>God's Trombones</i>; J. Mason Brewer, <i>American Negro Folklore</i>; and William H. Pipes, <i>Say Amen, Brother</i>!</p>
<p class="notesz1"><a href="chapter02.xhtml#ch02-fn11" id="ch02-fnr11">11</a>. Cited in Hughes and Bontemps, <i>Negro Folklore</i>, pp. 156–157.</p>
<p class="notesz1"><a href="chapter02.xhtml#ch02-fn12" id="ch02-fnr12">12</a>. Cited in Zora Neale Hurston, <i>Mules and Men</i> (New York: Harper Perennial Library, 1970), p. 44.</p>
<p class="notesz1"><a href="chapter02.xhtml#ch02-fn13" id="ch02-fnr13">13</a>. Sources and texts of the spirituals are numerous. For an interpretation of the theological significance of the spirituals, see my <i>The Spirituals and the Blues</i> (New York: Seabury Press, 1972; Maryknoll, N.Y.: Orbis Books, 1991); see also Howard Thurman, <i>The Negro Spiritual Speaks of Life and Death</i> (New York: Harper &amp; Row, 1947), and <i>Deep River</i> (Port Washington, N.Y.: Kennikat Press, 1969). The best collection of the text and music of the spirituals is James W. Johnson and J. Rosamond Johnson, <i>The Books of American Negro Spirituals</i> (New York: Viking Press, 1925). See also John W. Work, <i>American Negro Songs and Spirituals</i> (New York: Bonanza Books, 1940). The earliest book collection of slave songs is William F. Allen, Charles P. Ware, and Lucy McKim Garrison, <i>Slave Songs of the United States</i> (New York: A. Simpson &amp; Co. 1867). One of the best and most comprehensive studies on the spirituals is John Lowell, Jr., <i>Black Song: The Forge and the Flame</i> (New York: Macmillan Co., 1972).</p>
<a id="page_230"/>
<p class="notesz1">Unfortunately, the gospel songs have not been studied as seriously as the spirituals. The best volume I know of is Michael W. Harris, <i>The Rise of Gospel Blues: The Music of Thomas Dorsey in the Urban Church</i> (New York: Oxford University Press, 1992); see also <i>The Gospel Sound</i> by Tony Heilbut (New York: Simon and Schuster, 1971). For the lyrics, see L. Hughes and A. Bontemps, <i>Negro Folklore</i>, Chap. XII. See especially the special issue on Thomas Dorsey, “Father of Gospel Music,” in <i>Black World</i>, July 1974.</p>
<p class="notesz1">Again, the best introduction to the black song is the black church. Failing that, I would suggest the recordings by Mahalia Jackson, James Cleveland, Clara Ward, and Paul Robeson. I strongly suggest Aretha Franklin's album entitled “Amazing Grace,” with James Cleveland and the Southern California Community Choir (Atlantic Recording Corporation, New York, 1972).</p>
<p class="notesz1"><a href="chapter02.xhtml#ch02-fn14" id="ch02-fnr14">14</a>. Brewer, <i>American Negro Folklore</i>, pp. 3–4. For authenticity, most scholars still regard Joel Chandler Harris, <i>Uncle Remus: His Songs and His Sayings</i> (New York: Houghton, Mifflin and Co., 1881) as the most significant. On Br'er Rabbit and other animal tales, see also L. Hughes and A. Bontemps, <i>Negro Folklore</i>, Chaps. I and II.</p>
<p class="notesz1"><a href="chapter02.xhtml#ch02-fn15" id="ch02-fnr15">15</a>. Cited in William F. Cheek, <i>Black Resistance before the Civil War</i> (Beverly Hills, Calif.: Glencoe Press, 1970), p. 51.</p>
<p class="notesz1"><a href="chapter02.xhtml#ch02-fn16" id="ch02-fnr16">16</a>. Ibid.</p>
<p class="notesz1"><a href="chapter02.xhtml#ch02-fn17" id="ch02-fnr17">17</a>. Cited in Hughes and Bontemps, <i>Negro Folklore</i>, pp. 67–68.</p>
<p class="notesz1"><a href="chapter02.xhtml#ch02-fn18" id="ch02-fnr18">18</a>. For an account of the tales about High John the Conqueror, see Zora Neale Hurston, “High John De Conquer,” in Hughes and Bontemps, <i>Negro Folklore</i>, pp. 93–102; see also her excellent work, <i>Mules and Men</i> (New York: Harper &amp; Row, 1970), originally published in 1935. See J. Mason Brewer, <i>American Negro Folklore</i>; Julius Lester, <i>Black Folktales</i> (New York: Grove Press, 1969).</p>
<p class="notesz1"><a href="chapter02.xhtml#ch02-fn19" id="ch02-fnr19">19</a>. Zora N. Hurston, “High John De Conquer,” in Hughes and Bontemps, op. cit., pp. 93–94.</p>
<p class="notesz1"><a href="chapter02.xhtml#ch02-fn20" id="ch02-fnr20">20</a>. Ibid.</p>
<p class="notesz1"><a href="chapter02.xhtml#ch02-fn21" id="ch02-fnr21">21</a>. Ibid.</p>
<p class="notesz1"><a href="chapter02.xhtml#ch02-fn22" id="ch02-fnr22">22</a>. Ibid., p. 96.</p>
<p class="notesz1"><a href="chapter02.xhtml#ch02-fn23" id="ch02-fnr23">23</a>. The blues have been given much study. For an introduction to the theological implications of the blues, see my <i>The Spirituals and the Blues</i>, Chap. 6. The best one-volume work on the blues and jazz is LeRoi Jones, <i>Blues People</i> (New York: William Morrow, 1963); see also Charles Keil, <i>Urban Blues</i> (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1966); Paul Oliver, <i>The Meaning of the Blues</i> (New York: Collier Books, 1963), <i>The Story of the Blues</i> (Philadelphia: Chilton Book Co., 1969); Albert Murray, <i>Stomping the Blues</i> (New York: McGraw-Hill, 1976); Nelson George, <i>The Death of Rhythm and Blues</i> (New York: Plume Book, 1988); Jon Michael Spencer <a id="page_231"/>(ed.), <i>Sacred Music of the Secular City: From Blues to Rap</i> (Durham, NC: Duke University Press, 1992.)</p>
<p class="notesz1"><a href="chapter02.xhtml#ch02-fn24" id="ch02-fnr24">24</a>. For an introduction to slave and ex-slave narratives, see Arna Bontemps, <i>Great Slave Narratives</i> (Boston: Beacon Press, 1969); W. L. Katz (ed.), <i>Five Slave Narratives</i> (New York: Arno Press, 1969); B. A. Botkin, <i>Lay My Burden Down</i> (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1945); Norman R. Yetman, <i>Life Under the “Peculiar Institution</i>” (New York: Holt, Rinehart and Winston, 1970). See also Frederick Douglass's autobiography, <i>Life and Times of Frederick Douglass</i> (New York: Collier Books, 1962), reprinted from the revised edition of 1892. See also the very important <i>God Struck Me Dead</i>, ed. Clifton H. Johnson (Boston: Pilgrim Press, 1969).</p>
<p class="notesz1"><a href="chapter02.xhtml#ch02-fn25" id="ch02-fnr25">25</a>. This comment was made by the celebrated ex-slave Ellen Craft; see her letter in Carter G. Woodson, <i>The Mind of the Negro as Reflected in Letters during the Crisis, 1800–1860</i> (New York: Russell and Russell, 1969), p. 265, originally published in 1926.</p>
<p class="notesz1"><a href="chapter02.xhtml#ch02-fn26" id="ch02-fnr26">26</a>. Claude McKay, “If We Must Die,” in <i>Black Voices</i>, ed. Abraham Chapman (New York: New American Library, 1968), pp. 372–373. For a critical evaluation of the Harlem Renaissance of the 1920s and early 30s, see Nathan I. Huggins, <i>Harlem Renaissance</i> (New York: Oxford University Press, 1971). See also Alain Locke, <i>The New Negro</i> (New York: Atheneum, 1969), originally published in 1925.</p>
<p class="notesz1"><a href="chapter02.xhtml#ch02-fn27" id="ch02-fnr27">27</a>. Ibid., p. 273.</p>
<p class="notesz1"><a href="chapter02.xhtml#ch02-fn28" id="ch02-fnr28">28</a>. Countee Cullen, “Yet Do I Marvel,” in <i>Black Voices</i>, p. 383.</p>
<p class="notesz1"><a href="chapter02.xhtml#ch02-fn29" id="ch02-fnr29">29</a>. Billy Taylor and Dick Dallas, “I Wish I Knew How It Would Feel to Be Free,” in <i>The Poetry of Soul</i>, ed. A. X. Nicholas (New York: Bantam Books, 1971), p. 57.</p>
<p class="notesz1"><a href="chapter02.xhtml#ch02-fn30" id="ch02-fnr30">30</a>. LeRoi Jones (Imamu Amiri Baraka), <i>Home</i> (New York: William Morrow, 1966), p. 251. For an analysis of the black poets of the 1960s see Don L. Lee, <i>Dynamite Voices</i>, Vol. I (Detroit: Broadside Press, 1971). See also, Abraham Chapman (ed.), <i>New Black Voices</i> (New York: New American Library, 1972).</p>
<p class="notesz1"><a href="chapter02.xhtml#ch02-fn31" id="ch02-fnr31">31</a>. J. Mason Brewer, <i>American Negro Folklore</i>, p. 6.</p>
<p class="notesz1"><a href="chapter02.xhtml#ch02-fn32" id="ch02-fnr32">32</a>. Barnwell, cited by Adam Small, “Black Versus Nihilism: Black Racism Rejected,” in <i>Black Theology: The South African Voice</i> (London: C. Hurst &amp; Co., 1973), p. 14.</p>
<p class="notesz1"><a href="chapter02.xhtml#ch02-fn33" id="ch02-fnr33">33</a>. See Richard Allen, <i>The Life Experience and Gospel Labors of the Rt. Rev. Richard Allen</i> (Nashville: Abingdon Press, 1960).</p>
<p class="notesz1"><a href="chapter02.xhtml#ch02-fn34" id="ch02-fnr34">34</a>. See Walker, <i>Appeal and an Address to the Slaves of the United States of America by H. H. Garnet</i> (New York: Arno Press, 1969).</p>
<p class="notesz1"><a href="chapter02.xhtml#ch02-fn35" id="ch02-fnr35">35</a>. See H. M. Turner, “God is a Negro,” in J. H. Bracey, Jr., A. Meier, and E. Rudwick (eds.), <i>Black Nationalism in America</i> (New York: Bobbs-Merrill, 1970), pp. 154–155; Howard Thurman, <i>Jesus and the Disinherited</i> <a id="page_232"/>(Nashville: Abingdon Press, 1949); M. L. King, Jr., <i>Why We Can't Wait</i> (New York: Signet Books, 1963).</p>
<p class="notesz1"><a href="chapter02.xhtml#ch02-fn36" id="ch02-fnr36">36</a>. Paul makes a similar point in I Cor. 1:26f.: “To shame the wise, God has chosen what the world counts weakness. He has chosen things low and contemptible, mere nothings, to overthrow the existing order.”</p>
<p class="notesz1"><a href="chapter02.xhtml#ch02-fn37" id="ch02-fnr37">37</a>. <i>God Struck Me Dead</i>, ed. Clifton H. Johnson, p. 170.</p>
<p class="notesz1"><a href="chapter02.xhtml#ch02-fn38" id="ch02-fnr38">38</a>. My theological emphasis on Scripture as a source of Black Theology and Jesus Christ as its content has led some black theologians to charge me with merely the blackenization of white Christian theology. Therefore Gayraud Wilmore asks: “Is Black theology simply the Blackenization of the whole spectrum of traditional Christian theology, with particular emphasis upon the liberation of the oppressed, or does it find in the experience of the oppression of Black people, as <i>black</i>, a singular religiosity, identified not only as Christianity, but with other religions as well?” (<i>Black Religion and Black Radicalism</i> [Garden City, N.Y.: Doubleday, 1972; rev. ed. Maryknoll, N.Y.: Orbis Books, 1983], p. 296). Wilmore goes on to suggest three sources of Black Theology: (1) “the existing Black community, where the tradition of Black folk religion is still extant and continues to stand over against the institutional church” (p. 298); (2) “the writings and addresses of the Black preacher and the public men of the past” (p. 300); and (3) “the traditional religions of Africa” (p. 302). I am sympathetic to Wilmore and other black theologians’ concern to broaden the scope of Black Theology's meaning. Indeed the present work is an attempt to hear their critiques of my previous writing which failed to take seriously enough the black experience in the construction of a Black Theology. But I do not agree with their implication that the use of Scripture as a critical source and of Jesus Christ as the content of Black Theology is simply to make <i>black</i> what white people have been doing for two thousand years. The real test of whether any given articulation of Black Theology is <i>black</i> does not depend on what Wilmore, Cone, or any other theologian says; rather, it depends upon whether the particular theology is consistent with what black people believe to be the basis of their struggle. Therefore we will have to wait and see how black people respond to what we say. Their response is the only test. At this writing, I cannot change my emphasis on Jesus Christ and Scripture, because the emphasis seems to be a decisive ingredient of the black experience as I and others have lived it in North America. I cannot change my point of departure merely because of the <i>intellectual</i> persuasion of a few black theologians who know more about Africa than the masses of black people. Either Black Theology is a theological expression of the hopes and dreams of black people, or it is an articulation of the intellectual interests of black professors. If the former, as I think it must be, then its meaning must be decided by the people about whom it claims to speak. The black theologian cannot claim to know what the people <i>ought</i> to believe <a id="page_233"/>or claim to have a “secret” knowledge that transcends the faith of the community. Thus what I write as Black Theology is what I believe to be the faith of the black church community which claims my allegiance. This means that I am persuaded that Black Theology is <i>Church</i> theology. It is this community about whom it seeks to speak. To be sure, there are blacks who reject the Church and thus do not regard it as a liberating agent. I simply disagree and take my stand with Richard Allen and James Varick. Their faith is my faith, and that is why I cannot exclude Jesus Christ and his witness in the Scripture, although I insist that Jesus’ person must be defined by the oppressed of the land. Of course I believe that Black Theology must listen to other elements in our experience that are not specifically Christian; but these other elements cannot be the point of departure or the norm of Black Theology. The norm is Jesus Christ as witnessed in Scripture and the black experience. My problem with Gay Wilmore and others who stress the uniqueness of Black Theology is their failure to define clearly enough the <i>norm</i> for the interpretation of the sources they suggest for Black Theology. Our disagreement is not at the point of the <i>sources</i> of Black Theology but in its norm. I say the norm is Jesus Christ, and Wilmore disagrees; but, and this is important, <i>he does not tell us what the norm is</i>. It is not very helpful to reject my point of departure and fail to offer an alternative starting point.</p>
<p class="notesz1"><a href="chapter02.xhtml#ch02-fn39" id="ch02-fnr39">39</a>. Mari Evans, <i>I Am a Black Woman</i>, p. 92.</p>
<p class="head_n"><b>3. The Social Context of Theology</b></p>
<p class="notesz"><a href="chapter03.xhtml#ch03-fn1" id="ch03-fnr1">1</a>. Niebuhr, <i>The Meaning of Revelation</i> (New York: Macmillan Co., 1941), p. 35.</p>
<p class="notesz"><a href="chapter03.xhtml#ch03-fn2" id="ch03-fnr2">2</a>. Ibid., p. 10.</p>
<p class="notesz"><a href="chapter03.xhtml#ch03-fn3" id="ch03-fnr3">3</a>. Ludwig Feuerbach, <i>The Essence of Christianity</i>, trans. George Eliot (New York: Harper Torchbooks, 1957), pp. xxx-xxxvii.</p>
<p class="notesz"><a href="chapter03.xhtml#ch03-fn4" id="ch03-fnr4">4</a>. Ibid., pp. 11, 8.</p>
<p class="notesz"><a href="chapter03.xhtml#ch03-fn5" id="ch03-fnr5">5</a>. Ibid., pp. 17, 12.</p>
<p class="notesz"><a href="chapter03.xhtml#ch03-fn6" id="ch03-fnr6">6</a>. See Karl Barth's penetrating introductory essay in ibid; see also Sidney Hook, <i>From Hegel to Marx</i> (Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press, 1950); Herbert Marcuse, <i>Reason and Revolution</i> (Boston: Beacon Press, 1960); Robert Tucker, <i>The Philosophy and Myth in Karl Marx</i> (Cambridge, Eng.: Cambridge University Press, 1961); and H. R. MacKintosh, <i>Types of Modern Theology</i> (New York: Charles Scribner's Sons, 1937).</p>
<p class="notesz"><a href="chapter03.xhtml#ch03-fn7" id="ch03-fnr7">7</a>. Karl Marx and Friedrich Engels, <i>The German Ideology</i>, ed., with an introduction, by C. J. Arthur (New York: International Publishers, 1970), p. 60. See also Marx and Engels, <i>Basic Writings on Politics and Philosophy</i>, ed. Lewis S. Feuer (Garden City, N.Y.: Doubleday Anchor Books, 1959), p. 243.</p>
<a id="page_234"/>
<p class="notesz"><a href="chapter03.xhtml#ch03-fn8" id="ch03-fnr8">8</a>. Ibid., p. 64.</p>
<p class="notesz"><a href="chapter03.xhtml#ch03-fn9" id="ch03-fnr9">9</a>. I have in mind Marx's often-quoted eleventh thesis on Feuerbach: “The philosophers have only <i>interpreted</i> the world, in various ways; the point however, is to <i>change</i> it.” See Marx and Engels, <i>Basic Writings</i>, ed. Feuer, p. 245.</p>
<p class="notesz1"><a href="chapter03.xhtml#ch03-fn10" id="ch03-fnr10">10</a>. See Marx's second thesis in ibid., p. 243.</p>
<p class="notesz1"><a href="chapter03.xhtml#ch03-fn11" id="ch03-fnr11">11</a>. Cited in Ernst Bloch, <i>On Karl Marx</i>, trans. John Maxwell (New York: Herder and Herder, 1971), p. 59.</p>
<p class="notesz1"><a href="chapter03.xhtml#ch03-fn12" id="ch03-fnr12">12</a>. Marx and Engels, <i>Basic Writings</i>, ed. Feuer, p. 244 (4th thesis).</p>
<p class="notesz1"><a href="chapter03.xhtml#ch03-fn13" id="ch03-fnr13">13</a>. Marx and Engels, <i>The German Ideology</i>, p. 47.</p>
<p class="notesz1"><a href="chapter03.xhtml#ch03-fn14" id="ch03-fnr14">14</a>. Ibid., p. 118.</p>
<p class="notesz1"><a href="chapter03.xhtml#ch03-fn15" id="ch03-fnr15">15</a>. The term “sociology of knowledge” was used in Germany by Max Scheler during the 1920s and was popularized in the English-speaking world by Karl Mannheim. For a brief background on the development of this discipline, see Berger and Luckmann's, <i>The Social Construction of Reality</i> (Garden City, N.Y.: Doubleday Anchor Books, 1967); for a more detailed analysis of the different perspectives on this discipline, see Stark, <i>The Sociology of Knowledge</i> (London: Routledge and Kegan Paul, 1958). See also Mannheim, <i>Ideology and Utopia</i>, trans. Louis Wirth and E. Shils (New York: Harcourt, Brace and World, 1936); Peter Berger, <i>Sacred Canopy</i> (Garden City, N. Y.: Doubleday Anchor Books, 1969).</p>
<p class="notesz1"><a href="chapter03.xhtml#ch03-fn16" id="ch03-fnr16">16</a>. Stark, <i>The Sociology of Knowledge</i>, p. ix.</p>
<p class="notesz1"><a href="chapter03.xhtml#ch03-fn17" id="ch03-fnr17">17</a>. Marx and Engels, <i>The German Ideology</i>, p. 51.</p>
<p class="notesz1"><a href="chapter03.xhtml#ch03-fn18" id="ch03-fnr18">18</a>. Marx and Engels, <i>Basic Writings on Politics and Philosophy</i>, p. 244.</p>
<p class="notesz1"><a href="chapter03.xhtml#ch03-fn19" id="ch03-fnr19">19</a>. Stark, <i>The Sociology of Knowledge</i>, pp. 16, 7f.</p>
<p class="notesz1"><a href="chapter03.xhtml#ch03-fn20" id="ch03-fnr20">20</a>. In Chaps. <a href="chapter04.xhtml">4</a> and <a href="chapter05.xhtml">5</a>, we will discuss “Biblical Revelation and Social Existence” and the relation between “Black Theology and Ideology.” Here we will argue that the social a priori of biblical revelation is incompatible with the axiological perspective of the ruling class. Therefore any theology that fails to make God's liberation of the oppressed from political bondage its point of departure for an exposition of the gospel is <i>ipso facto</i> not Christian. It also follows, as we will seek to demonstrate in <a href="chapter05.xhtml">Chapter 5</a>, that ideological thinking, or what the Bible calls false prophecy, is thought that ignores the liberation of the poor as the decisive ingredient of the gospel. But the point in this chapter is merely to demonstrate the social context of all thinking.</p>
<p class="notesz1"><a href="chapter03.xhtml#ch03-fn21" id="ch03-fnr21">21</a>. More than any of his American theological contemporaries, H. Richard Niebuhr has investigated the problem of the relativity of theological knowledge. The influences of Troeltsch, Weber, and Tawney are obvious. Cf. <i>The Social Sources of Denominationalism</i> (New York: Meridian Books, 1957), originally published in 1929. See also his <i>The Kingdom of God in America</i> (New York: Harper &amp; Row, 1937); <i>The Meaning of Revelation</i> (New York: Macmillan Co., 1941); <i>Christ and Culture</i> (New York: Harper &amp; Row, 1951). On social existence and color, see his <i>Social Sources</i>: Chap. 9 <a id="page_235"/>discusses “Denominationalism and the Color Line.” It is an excellent analysis, except for one very obvious weakness. Niebuhr suggests that the division of the church along the racial line was due not to theology but to social realities. “The causes of the racial schism,” he writes, “are not difficult to determine. Neither theology nor polity furnished the occasion for it. The sole source of this denominationalism is social.” Not so! For that statement assumes that the theology of the socially racist was adequate and that depraved social views did not affect theological doctrine. He fails here to recognize the dialectic relation between social reality and theological reflection. The fact that racism affected the white churches’ doctrinal statements is most clearly shown in the <i>absence</i> of any reference in them to color and prejudice. The importance of this for black churches, from the perspective of doctrine (despite Niebuhr's insulting reference to “the lack of theological speculation among the Negroes”) is the choice of name as a description of their places of worship, namely the <i>African</i> Methodist Episcopal Church, the <i>African</i> Methodist Episcopal Zion Church, etc. The A.M.E. Church chose a motto which expressed their doctrinal stand: “God Our Father, Christ Our Redeemer, Man Our Brother.” I think Niebuhr's cultural definition of theology caused him to overstate his case. Niebuhr's failure to see the doctrinal issue involved in racism is perhaps the reason he does not regard the white church as existing in the state of apostasy. He still seems to think that racism is a terrible thing and ought to be removed but not so terrible as to deny the essence of the gospel. The white church can be racist and Christian—at the same time! Perhaps this explains why Niebuhr never bothered to discuss the matter seriously after 1929.</p>
<p class="notesz1"><a href="chapter03.xhtml#ch03-fn22" id="ch03-fnr22">22</a>. Van Harvey, <i>The Historian and the Believer</i> (New York: Macmillan Co., 1966), p. xi.</p>
<p class="notesz1"><a href="chapter03.xhtml#ch03-fn23" id="ch03-fnr23">23</a>. Marx, <i>The German Ideology</i>, p. 103.</p>
<p class="notesz1"><a href="chapter03.xhtml#ch03-fn24" id="ch03-fnr24">24</a>. Marx and Engels, <i>Basic Writings on Politics and Philosophy</i>, pp. 24, 26.</p>
<p class="notesz1"><a href="chapter03.xhtml#ch03-fn25" id="ch03-fnr25">25</a>. Cited in H. Shelton Smith, <i>In His Image, But…: Racism in Southern Religion, 1780–1910</i> (Durham: Duke University Press, 1972), pp. 6f. See especially the sermons by Mather and Bacon in Gilbert Osofsky, <i>The Burden of Race</i> (New York: Harper Torchbooks, 1968), pp. 35–44.</p>
<p class="notesz1"><a href="chapter03.xhtml#ch03-fn26" id="ch03-fnr26">26</a>. Cited in H. S. Smith, <i>In His Image, But</i>…, p. 37.</p>
<p class="notesz1"><a href="chapter03.xhtml#ch03-fn27" id="ch03-fnr27">27</a>. Ibid., p. 38.</p>
<p class="notesz1"><a href="chapter03.xhtml#ch03-fn28" id="ch03-fnr28">28</a>. Ibid., p. 45.</p>
<p class="notesz1"><a href="chapter03.xhtml#ch03-fn29" id="ch03-fnr29">29</a>. Cf. William and Jane Pease (eds.), <i>The Antislavery Argument</i> (New York: Bobbs-Merrill, 1965).</p>
<p class="notesz1"><a href="chapter03.xhtml#ch03-fn30" id="ch03-fnr30">30</a>. Leon F. Litwack, <i>North of Slavery</i> (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1961), p. 227.</p>
<p class="notesz1"><a href="chapter03.xhtml#ch03-fn31" id="ch03-fnr31">31</a>. See Herzog, <i>Liberation Theology</i> (New York: Seabury Press, 1972); Lehmann, <i>Ethics in a Christian Context</i> (New York: Harper &amp; Row, 1963); <a id="page_236"/>Schaull, <i>Containment and Change</i>, coauthored with Carl Oglesby (New York: Macmillan Co., 1967); Braaten, <i>The Future of God</i> (New York: Harper &amp; Row, 1969). Another important contribution to theology is Peter Hodgson, <i>Children of Freedom</i> (Philadelphia: Fortress Press, 1974). Unfortunately that book was published after I had completed this work. It is an example of the kind of dialogue needed if white theologians expect to break out of their cultural limitations. Another recent work, Paul Lehmann's, <i>The Transfiguration of Politics</i> (New York: Harper and Row, 1975) is even more important than Hodgson's in laying a foundation for conversation between black and white theologians. I am sorry it was published too late for me to address it in this book.</p>
<p class="notesz1"><a href="chapter03.xhtml#ch03-fn32" id="ch03-fnr32">32</a>. Cf. the “Introduction” in <i>Liberation Theology</i>, pp. 1–22.</p>
<p class="notesz1"><a href="chapter03.xhtml#ch03-fn33" id="ch03-fnr33">33</a>. Niebuhr, <i>Social Sources</i>, p. 16.</p>
<p class="notesz1"><a href="chapter03.xhtml#ch03-fn34" id="ch03-fnr34">34</a>. DeWolf, <i>A Theology of the Living Church</i> (New York: Harper &amp; Row, 1953), p. 18.</p>
<p class="notesz1"><a href="chapter03.xhtml#ch03-fn35" id="ch03-fnr35">35</a>. Tillich, <i>Systematic Theology</i>, Vol. I (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1951), p. 3.</p>
<p class="notesz1"><a href="chapter03.xhtml#ch03-fn36" id="ch03-fnr36">36</a>. Marx, <i>On Religion</i> (New York: Schocken Books, 1964), pp. 74–75.</p>
<p class="notesz1"><a href="chapter03.xhtml#ch03-fn37" id="ch03-fnr37">37</a>. Bloch, <i>A Philosophy of the Future</i>, trans. J. Cumming (New York: Herder and Herder, 1970), pp. 2f.</p>
<p class="notesz1"><a href="chapter03.xhtml#ch03-fn38" id="ch03-fnr38">38</a>. Cited in Langston Hughes and Arna Bontemps (eds.), <i>Book of Negro Folklore</i> (New York: Dodd, Mead &amp; Co., 1958), p. 234.</p>
<p class="notesz1"><a href="chapter03.xhtml#ch03-fn39" id="ch03-fnr39">39</a>. Zora Neale Hurston, <i>Mules and Men</i> (New York: Harper Perennial Library, 1970), pp. 18–19.</p>
<p class="head_n"><b>4. <i>Biblical Revelation and Social Existence</i></b></p>
<p class="notesz"><a href="chapter04.xhtml#ch04-fn1" id="ch04-fnr1">1</a>. Bernhard W. Anderson, <i>Understanding the Old Testament</i> (Englewood Cliffs, N.J.: Prentice-Hall, 1957), pp. 289–290.</p>
<p class="notesz"><a href="chapter04.xhtml#ch04-fn2" id="ch04-fnr2">2</a>. Gerhard von Rad, <i>Old Testament Theology</i>, Vol. I, trans. D.M.G. Stalker (New York: Harper &amp; Row, 1962), p. 41.</p>
<p class="notesz"><a href="chapter04.xhtml#ch04-fn3" id="ch04-fnr3">3</a>. Anderson, <i>Understanding the Old Testament</i>, p. 377.</p>
<p class="notesz"><a href="chapter04.xhtml#ch04-fn4" id="ch04-fnr4">4</a>. Although few New Testament scholars question the historical validity of Jesus’ baptism by John, yet the question of the accessibility of the historical Jesus has undergone much discussion in the twentieth century. Since the publication of Albert Schweitzer's <i>The Quest of the Historical Jesus</i> (1906) and the rise of Form Criticism shortly thereafter, it was commonplace to hear distinctions drawn between the Jesus of history and the Christ of faith. The former referred to the person accessible to the tools of historical scholarship, and the latter to the proclamation and teachings of the early Church. It was generally assumed by Rudolf Bultmann that practically nothing can be known of the Jesus of history. See his <i>Jesus and the Word</i>, <a id="page_237"/>trans. L. P. Smith and E. H. Lantera (New York: Charles Scribner's Sons, 1934), where he says: “I do indeed think that we can now know almost nothing concerning the personality of Jesus” (p. 8). That view tended to dominate New Testament scholarship in Germany until the 1950s when many of Bultmann's followers began to speak of the New quest for the historical Jesus. These persons (who included Ernst Käsemann, Günther Bornkamm, Hans Conzelmann, and Ernst Fuchs) recognized that Bultmann's historical skepticism not only had scientific flaws but also, and more importantly, threatened the foundation of the faith itself. Käsemann expressed it well: “Only if Jesus’ proclamation decisively coincides with the proclamation about Jesus is it understandable, reasonable, and necessary that the Christian kerygma in the New Testament conceals the message of Jesus; only then is the resurrected Jesus the historical Jesus. From this perspective we are required, precisely as theologians, to inquire behind Easter…. By this means we shall learn whether he stands behind the word of his church or not, whether the Christian kerygma is a myth that can be detached from his word and from himself or whether it binds us historically and insolubly to him” (cited in Wolfhart Pannenberg, <i>Jesus—God and Man</i>, trans. L. L. Wilkins and D. A. Priebe [Philadelphia: Westminster Press, 1968], p. 56). For a detailed discussion of this problem, see James Robinson, <i>The New Quest of the Historical Jesus</i> (London: SCM Press, 1959); also Hugh Anderson, <i>Jesus and Christian Origins</i> (New York: Oxford University Press, 1964).</p>
<p class="notesz">It should be made clear that this chapter (and the book as a whole) is being written on the assumption that there is no radical distinction between the Jesus of history and the Christ of faith. I have discussed elsewhere this issue and have located the indispensable historical datum (without which the gospel is no longer valid) as Jesus’ identification with the oppressed (<i>A Black Theology of Liberation</i>, Chap. 6). The key, therefore, to the baptism incident (and others reported in the Gospels) for our purposes is not only “Did it really happen?” but also “What is the theological meaning embedded in it?” Although history <i>qua</i> history is the place where revelation happens, it is not revelation. Revelation is the disclosure of God in the social context of history but is not identical with it. Since I contend that the Jesus of the Gospels cannot be separated from the “real” Jesus, and have discussed the reasons for this conclusion elsewhere, there is no need here to enter into the critical discussion about the old and new quests for the historical Jesus. The text of the New Testament serves not only as a theological check on what we theologians are permitted to do with Jesus; it also serves as a <i>historical</i> check against contemporary historians.</p>
<p class="notesz"><a href="chapter04.xhtml#ch04-fn5" id="ch04-fnr5">5</a>. There has been much discussion about Jesus’ probable attitude toward John the Baptist. Jesus certainly saw his ministry connected with John's, and <a id="page_238"/>there is evidence from the Fourth Gospel that he received his first disciples from John (1:35–39). For a discussion of John's relation to Jesus, see Joachim Jeremias, <i>New Testament Theology</i>, trans. John Bowden (New York: Charles Scribner's Sons, 1971), pp. 43ff.</p>
<p class="notesz"><a href="chapter04.xhtml#ch04-fn6" id="ch04-fnr6">6</a>. One of the few exceptions is Ernst Käsemann whose writings disclose an unusual sensitivity to the use of the gospel as an opiate of the oppressed. “Every word, every deed, every demonstration is a denial of our Lord and ourselves, unless we test them from the point of view of whether they are opium of the people, or can be regarded and abused as such.” (<i>Jesus Means Freedom</i>, trans. Frank Clarke [London: SCM Press, 1969], p. 13). See also his <i>New Testament Questions of Today</i>, trans. W. J. Montague (Philadelphia: Fortress Press, 1969); <i>Perspectives on Paul</i>, trans. Margret Kohl (Philadelphia: Fortress Press, 1971.)</p>
<p class="notesz"><a href="chapter04.xhtml#ch04-fn7" id="ch04-fnr7">7</a>. See J. Jeremias, <i>New Testament Theology</i>, p. 103f.</p>
<p class="notesz"><a href="chapter04.xhtml#ch04-fn8" id="ch04-fnr8">8</a>. Ibid., p. 112.</p>
<p class="notesz"><a href="chapter04.xhtml#ch04-fn9" id="ch04-fnr9">9</a>. Ibid., p. 116.</p>
<p class="notesz1"><a href="chapter04.xhtml#ch04-fn10" id="ch04-fnr10">10</a>. For the exegetical support of the exclusive interpretation of Matt. 21:31, see J. Jeremias, <i>New Testament Theology</i>, p. 117. “The Προαγουσι'μσαs…does not denote a priority in time, but an exclusive displacement of the others.”</p>
<p class="head_n"><b><i>5. Black Theology and Ideology</i></b></p>
<p class="notesz"><a href="chapter05.xhtml#ch05-fn1" id="ch05-fnr1">1</a>. H. Richard Niebuhr, <i>Christ and Culture</i> (New York: Harper Torchbooks, 1956), p. 2, originally published in 1951.</p>
<p class="notesz"><a href="chapter05.xhtml#ch05-fn2" id="ch05-fnr2">2</a>. Ibid., p. 45.</p>
<p class="notesz"><a href="chapter05.xhtml#ch05-fn3" id="ch05-fnr3">3</a>. Ibid., p. 41.</p>
<p class="notesz"><a href="chapter05.xhtml#ch05-fn4" id="ch05-fnr4">4</a>. Ibid., p. 83.</p>
<p class="notesz"><a href="chapter05.xhtml#ch05-fn5" id="ch05-fnr5">5</a>. Ibid., pp. 41–42.</p>
<p class="notesz"><a href="chapter05.xhtml#ch05-fn6" id="ch05-fnr6">6</a>. Ibid., p. 145.</p>
<p class="notesz"><a href="chapter05.xhtml#ch05-fn7" id="ch05-fnr7">7</a>. Ibid., p. 151.</p>
<p class="notesz"><a href="chapter05.xhtml#ch05-fn8" id="ch05-fnr8">8</a>. Ibid., p. 191.</p>
<p class="notesz"><a href="chapter05.xhtml#ch05-fn9" id="ch05-fnr9">9</a>. Ibid., p. 192.</p>
<p class="notesz1"><a href="chapter05.xhtml#ch05-fn10" id="ch05-fnr10">10</a>. Ibid., p. 194.</p>
<p class="notesz1"><a href="chapter05.xhtml#ch05-fn11" id="ch05-fnr11">11</a>. Ibid., p. 195.</p>
<p class="notesz1"><a href="chapter05.xhtml#ch05-fn12" id="ch05-fnr12">12</a>. Ibid., p. 14.</p>
<p class="notesz1"><a href="chapter05.xhtml#ch05-fn13" id="ch05-fnr13">13</a>. Ibid., p. 32.</p>
<p class="notesz1"><a href="chapter05.xhtml#ch05-fn14" id="ch05-fnr14">14</a>. Mannheim, <i>Ideology and Utopia</i>, trans. Louis Wirth and E. Shils (New York: Harcourt, Brace and World, 1936), pp. 56–57.</p>
<p class="notesz1"><a href="chapter05.xhtml#ch05-fn15" id="ch05-fnr15">15</a>. Cited in Carol George, <i>Segregated Sabbaths: Richard Allen and the Emergence of Independent Black Churches, 1760–1840</i> (New York: Oxford University Press, 1973), p. 160.</p>
<a id="page_239"/>
<p class="notesz1"><a href="chapter05.xhtml#ch05-fn16" id="ch05-fnr16">16</a>. L. Hughes and A. Bontemps (eds.), <i>Book of Negro Folklore</i> (New York: Dodd, Mead &amp; Co., 1958), p. 13.</p>
<p class="notesz1"><a href="chapter05.xhtml#ch05-fn17" id="ch05-fnr17">17</a>. Words from a black prayer, in ibid., p. 256.</p>
<p class="notesz1"><a href="chapter05.xhtml#ch05-fn18" id="ch05-fnr18">18</a>. Lyrics of the gospel song “Move on up a Little Higher” by Mahalia Jackson and Theodore Frye, in ibid., pp. 323–325.</p>
<p class="head_n"><b><i>6. Who Is Jesus Christ for Us Today?</i></b></p>
<p class="notesz"><a href="chapter06.xhtml#ch06-fn1" id="ch06-fnr1">1</a>. Included in <i>Kerygma and Myth</i>, ed. H. W. Bartsch and trans. R. H. Fuller (New York: Harper Torchbooks, 1961), pp. 1–44. Bultmann's essay was originally published in 1941.</p>
<p class="notesz"><a href="chapter06.xhtml#ch06-fn2" id="ch06-fnr2">2</a>. Barr, <i>The Bible in the Modern World</i> (New York: Harper &amp; Row, 1973).</p>
<p class="notesz"><a href="chapter06.xhtml#ch06-fn3" id="ch06-fnr3">3</a>. See Ernst Bloch's comments in <i>Atheism in Christianity</i>, trans. J. Swann (New York: Herder and Herder, 1972): “To think is to step over, to over step” (p. 9).</p>
<p class="notesz"><a href="chapter06.xhtml#ch06-fn4" id="ch06-fnr4">4</a>. Pannenberg, <i>Jesus—God and Man</i>, trans. L. L. Wilkins and D. A. Priebe (Philadelphia: Westminster Press, 1968), p. 48. Of course, Pannenberg intends to say much more in this statement than is suggested in my use of it here. He speaks, I think wrongly, of “revelation as history,” and not simply the latter as the foundation of the former. Consequently he insists upon Jesus’ resurrection as a historical event. See also his <i>Revelation as History</i>, trans. David Granskou (New York: Macmillan Co., 1969); <i>Theology and the Kingdom of God</i> (Philadelphia: Westminster Press, 1969); see also James M. Robinson and John B. Cobb, Jr. (eds.), <i>Theology as History</i> (New York: Harper &amp; Row, 1967).</p>
<p class="notesz"><a href="chapter06.xhtml#ch06-fn5" id="ch06-fnr5">5</a>. While insisting on the necessity of the historical Jesus for christological reflections, I am aware of the historical difficulties associated with the four Gospels, the primary source for knowledge of Jesus. See my discussion in <a href="notes.xhtml#ch04-fnr4">Chap. 4, note 4</a>, and <i>A Black Theology of Liberation</i>, Chap. 6. My point here and elsewhere is clear enough: The truth of Jesus Christ stands or falls on the historical validity of the biblical claim that Jesus identified with the poor and the outcasts. That historical fact alone does not provide the evidence that Jesus is the Christ, for the same could be said of other people in history; but without this historical fact, the claim that God has come to liberate the weak in Jesus is sheer illusion.</p>
<p class="notesz">Of course I do not intend to make the Christian faith dependent upon scholarly investigations, for scholars are not immune to social and political interests. But the truth of the faith is not threatened by critical scholarship. Furthermore, the risks involved in academic pursuits are related to the risk of faith itself, from which no one is excluded. Indeed the honest acceptance of risk and its implications for faith provides an openness in faith and thus willingness to listen to other viewpoints. The result of scholarship is merely one <a id="page_240"/>viewpoint which must be weighed in the context of human experience. For an excellent analysis of the historical Jesus’ relation to the Christian faith, see Leander E. Keck, <i>A Future for the Historical Jesus</i> (Nashville: Abingdon Press, 1971).</p>
<p class="notesz"><a href="chapter06.xhtml#ch06-fn6" id="ch06-fnr6">6</a>. Harnack, <i>History of Dogma</i>, Vol. IV, trans. Neil Buchanan (New York: Dover Publications, 1961), p. 139.</p>
<p class="notesz"><a href="chapter06.xhtml#ch06-fn7" id="ch06-fnr7">7</a>. Athanasius, “On the Incarnation,” in <i>The Library of Christian Classics</i>, Vol. III, Edward R. Hardy in collaboration with Cyril Richardson (Philadelphia: Westminster Press, 1954), p. 107. For another interpretation of the function of deification in the development of the early Church doctrines, see Jaroslav Pelikan, <i>The Christian Tradition</i>, Vol. I (Chicago: The University of Chicago Press, 1971).</p>
<p class="notesz"><a href="chapter06.xhtml#ch06-fn8" id="ch06-fnr8">8</a>. See Albert Schweitzer, <i>The Quest of the Historical Jesus</i> (original German title, <i>Von Reimarus zu Wrede</i> [1906]), trans. W. Montgomery (New York: Macmillan Co., 1961).</p>
<p class="notesz"><a href="chapter06.xhtml#ch06-fn9" id="ch06-fnr9">9</a>. Kierkegaard, <i>Training in Christianity</i>, trans. W. Lowrie (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1941), p. 28. In his <i>Philosophical Fragments</i>, trans. D. Swenson (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1962), he says: “If the contemporary generation had left nothing behind them but these words: ‘We have believed that in such and such a year that God appeared among us in the humble figure of a servant, that he lived and taught in our community, and finally died,’ it would be more than enough” (p. 130). See the comparison of Kierkegaard and Bultmann in Herbert C. Wolf, <i>Kierkegaard and Bultmann: The Quest of the Historical Jesus</i> (Minneapolis: Augsburg Publishing House, 1965).</p>
<p class="notesz1"><a href="chapter06.xhtml#ch06-fn10" id="ch06-fnr10">10</a>. Brunner, <i>The Mediator</i>, trans. Olive Wyon (London: Lutterworth Press, 1934).</p>
<p class="notesz1"><a href="chapter06.xhtml#ch06-fn11" id="ch06-fnr11">11</a>. Barth, <i>The Epistle to the Romans</i>, trans. E. C. Hoskyns (London: Oxford University Press, 1933).</p>
<p class="notesz1"><a href="chapter06.xhtml#ch06-fn12" id="ch06-fnr12">12</a>. Barth, <i>The Humanity of God</i>, trans. T. Wieser and J. Thomas, (Richmond: John Knox Press, 1960).</p>
<p class="notesz1"><a href="chapter06.xhtml#ch06-fn13" id="ch06-fnr13">13</a>. Pannenberg, <i>Jesus—God and Man</i>, p. 189. For another contemporary perspective on Christology that emphasizes the humanity of Christ, see W. Norman Pittenger, <i>The Word Incarnate</i> (New York: Harper &amp; Row, 1959); by the same author, <i>Christology Reconsidered</i> (London: SCM Press, 1970). An excellent treatise on the importance of Jesus’ humanity is John Knox, <i>The Humanity and Divinity of Christ</i> (Cambridge, Eng.: Cambridge University Press, 1967). On the issue of humanity and divinity in Jesus Christ, he writes: “If we should find ourselves in the position of having to decide between the pre-existence and a fully authentic human life, there is no doubt what our choice should be. Although it would be a grievous error to suppose that the humanity of Jesus is surer or more important than his divinity—the two are <a id="page_241"/>equally sure and more important than the pre-existence” (pp. 73–74). Another example of the importance of Jesus’ humanity, and thus history for Christology is Peter C. Hodgson, <i>Jesus—Word and Presence</i> (Philadelphia: Fortress Press, 1971).</p>
<p class="notesz1"><a href="chapter06.xhtml#ch06-fn14" id="ch06-fnr14">14</a>. J. Mason Brewer, <i>Worser Days and Better Times</i> (Chicago: Quadrangle Books, 1965), p. 103.</p>
<p class="notesz1"><a href="chapter06.xhtml#ch06-fn15" id="ch06-fnr15">15</a>. Pannenberg, <i>Jesus—God and Man</i>, p. 28.</p>
<p class="notesz1"><a href="chapter06.xhtml#ch06-fn16" id="ch06-fnr16">16</a>. Knox, <i>The Humanity and Divinity of Christ</i>, p. 3. Italics added.</p>
<p class="notesz1"><a href="chapter06.xhtml#ch06-fn17" id="ch06-fnr17">17</a>. See <a href="notes.xhtml#ch06-fnr8">note 8</a>, above.</p>
<p class="notesz1"><a href="chapter06.xhtml#ch06-fn18" id="ch06-fnr18">18</a>. Käsemann, “The Beginnings of Christian Theology,” in Robert W. Funk (ed.), <i>Apocalypticism: Journal for Theology and the Church</i> (New York: Herder and Herder, 1969), p. 40. The phrase “hope theology” derives its name primarily from Jürgen Moltmann's <i>Theology of Hope</i>, translated by James Leitch (New York: Harper &amp; Row, 1967). This volume was originally published in Germany under the title <i>Theologie der Hoffnung</i> (1965). Others associated with the theology of hope are Johannes B. Metz, <i>Theology of the World</i>, trans. William Glen-Doepel (New York: Herder and Herder, 1969) and Wolfhart Pannenberg. The latter is less political than Moltmann and Metz. I have already referred to Pannenberg's <i>Jesus—God and Man</i> (see <a href="notes.xhtml#ch06-fnr4">note 4</a> in this chapter). For a discussion of hope, see a symposium edited by Walter H. Capps with articles by Ernst Bloch, Pannenberg, Moltmann, and Metz in <i>Cross Currents</i>, Vol. XVIII, No. 3 (Summer 1968). When I speak of “hope theology” in this chapter, I am primarily referring to the work of Jürgen Moltmann. See especially his <i>Religion, Revolution and the Future</i>, trans. Douglas Meeks (New York: Charles Scribner's Sons, 1969). For additional discussions of the theology of hope, see W. Capps, <i>Time Invades the Cathedral: Tensions in the School of Hope</i>, (Philadelphia: Fortress, 1972).</p>
<p class="notesz1"><a href="chapter06.xhtml#ch06-fn19" id="ch06-fnr19">19</a>. Moltmann, <i>Theology of Hope</i>, p. 16.</p>
<p class="notesz1"><a href="chapter06.xhtml#ch06-fn20" id="ch06-fnr20">20</a>. See Thomas Ogletree (ed.), <i>Opening for Marxist-Christian Dialogue</i> (Nashville: Abingdon Press, 1968).</p>
<p class="notesz1"><a href="chapter06.xhtml#ch06-fn21" id="ch06-fnr21">21</a>. See the papers on the “Conference on Hope” in Ewert H. Cousins, <i>Hope and the Future of Man</i> (Philadelphia: Fortress Press, 1972). The participants included Philip Hefner, Carl Braaten, Jürgen Moltmann, John B. Cobb, Jr., Wolfhart Pannenberg, and Johannes B. Metz. The conference was held in New York City on October 8–10, 1971, and was “sponsored by the American Teilhard de Chardin Association, the Cardinal Bea Institute of Woodstock College, Goethe House New York (a branch of Goethe Institute Munich), Trinity Institute, and Union Theological Seminary in cooperation with Riverside Church” (ibid., pp. vii–viii).</p>
<p class="notesz1"><a href="chapter06.xhtml#ch06-fn22" id="ch06-fnr22">22</a>. Moltmann, “Response to the Opening Presentations” in ibid., p. 59.</p>
<p class="notesz1"><a href="chapter06.xhtml#ch06-fn23" id="ch06-fnr23">23</a>. For a comment on Moltmann's Christology, see Peter Hodgson, <a id="page_242"/><i>Jesus—Word and Presence</i>, pp. 60ff. See also Moltmann's <i>The Crucified God</i>, trans. R. Wilson and J. Bowden (New York: Harper &amp; Row, 1974).</p>
<p class="notesz1"><a href="chapter06.xhtml#ch06-fn24" id="ch06-fnr24">24</a>. Karl Marx and Friedrich Engels, <i>On Religion</i> (New York: Schocken Books, 1964), p. 42.</p>
<p class="head_n"><b><i>7. The Meaning of Liberation</i></b></p>
<p class="notesz"><a href="chapter07.xhtml#ch07-fn1" id="ch07-fnr1">1</a>. A letter of “Anthony Burns to the Baptist Church at Union, Fauquier Co., Virginia,” in Carter Woodson (ed.), <i>The Mind of the Negro as Reflected in Letters Written During the Crisis, 1800–1860</i> (New York: Russell and Russell, 1969), p. 660.</p>
<p class="notesz"><a href="chapter07.xhtml#ch07-fn2" id="ch07-fnr2">2</a>. David Walker and Henry H. Garnet, <i>Walker's Appeal/Garnet's Address</i> (New York: Arno Press, 1969), pp. 81–82. Walker's <i>Appeal</i> was originally published in 1829 and Garnet's address was delivered in 1843.</p>
<p class="notesz"><a href="chapter07.xhtml#ch07-fn3" id="ch07-fnr3">3</a>. Moltmann, <i>Religion, Revolution and the Future</i>, trans. Douglas Meeks (New York: Charles Scribner's Sons, 1969) p. 66.</p>
<p class="notesz"><a href="chapter07.xhtml#ch07-fn4" id="ch07-fnr4">4</a>. Ibid., p. 203.</p>
<p class="notesz"><a href="chapter07.xhtml#ch07-fn5" id="ch07-fnr5">5</a>. Clifton H. Johnson (ed.), <i>God Struck Me Dead</i> (Boston: Pilgrim Press, 1969), p. 149.</p>
<p class="notesz"><a href="chapter07.xhtml#ch07-fn6" id="ch07-fnr6">6</a>. Henry D. Spalding (ed.), <i>Encyclopedia of Black Folklore and Humor</i> (Middle Village, N.Y.: Jonathan David Publishers 1972), p. xv.</p>
<p class="notesz"><a href="chapter07.xhtml#ch07-fn7" id="ch07-fnr7">7</a>. Cited by C. Vann Woodward, “History from Slave Sources,” in <i>The American Historical Review</i>, Vol. 79, 2 (April 1974), p. 477.</p>
<p class="notesz"><a href="chapter07.xhtml#ch07-fn8" id="ch07-fnr8">8</a>. Casalis, <i>Portrait of Karl Barth</i>, introduced and trans. Robert McAfee Brown (Garden City, N.Y.: Doubleday, 1963), pp. 66–67.</p>
<p class="notesz"><a href="chapter07.xhtml#ch07-fn9" id="ch07-fnr9">9</a>. Moltmann, <i>Religion, Revolution and the Future</i>, p. 66.</p>
<p class="notesz1"><a href="chapter07.xhtml#ch07-fn10" id="ch07-fnr10">10</a>. I am indebted to an unpublished paper “Theology in the Context of Conflict” by Archie Le Mone of the World Council of Churches for this quotation.</p>
<p class="notesz1"><a href="chapter07.xhtml#ch07-fn11" id="ch07-fnr11">11</a>. J. H. Cone, <i>A Black Theology of Liberation</i> (Philadelphia: Lippincott, 1970; Maryknoll, N.Y.: Orbis Books, 1990), p. 160.</p>
<p class="notesz1"><a href="chapter07.xhtml#ch07-fn12" id="ch07-fnr12">12</a>. See Bonhoeffer's discussion in <i>The Cost of Discipleship</i>, trans. R. H. Fuller (New York: Macmillan Co., 1959).</p>
<p class="notesz1"><a href="chapter07.xhtml#ch07-fn13" id="ch07-fnr13">13</a>. This quotation is taken from Archie Le Mone's unpublished paper “Theology in the Context of Conflict.”</p>
<p class="notesz1"><a href="chapter07.xhtml#ch07-fn14" id="ch07-fnr14">14</a>. Franz Fanon, <i>The Wretched of the Earth</i> (New York: Grove Press, 66), p. 255.</p>
<p class="notesz1"><a href="chapter07.xhtml#ch07-fn15" id="ch07-fnr15">15</a>. Moltmann, <i>Religion, Revolution and the Future</i>, p. 79.</p>
<p class="notesz1"><a href="chapter07.xhtml#ch07-fn16" id="ch07-fnr16">16</a>. Erich Fromm, <i>Marx's Concept of Man</i> (New York: Frederick Ungar, 1971), p. 65.</p>
<p class="notesz1"><a href="chapter07.xhtml#ch07-fn17" id="ch07-fnr17">17</a>. Herbert Marcuse, <i>Reason and Revolution</i> (Boston: Beacon Press, 1960), p. 189.</p>
<a id="page_243"/>
<p class="notesz1"><a href="chapter07.xhtml#ch07-fn18" id="ch07-fnr18">18</a>. Cited in H. Richard Niebuhr, <i>The Social Sources of Denominationalism</i> (Cleveland: Meridian Books, 1969), p. 249.</p>
<p class="notesz1"><a href="chapter07.xhtml#ch07-fn19" id="ch07-fnr19">19</a>. Garnet, <i>An Address to the Slaves of the United States of America</i> (New York: Arno Press, 1969 reprint), p. 93.</p>
<p class="notesz1"><a href="chapter07.xhtml#ch07-fn20" id="ch07-fnr20">20</a>. Mari Evans, <i>I Am a Black Woman</i> (New York: William Morrow, 1970), p. 75.</p>
<p class="notesz1"><a href="chapter07.xhtml#ch07-fn21" id="ch07-fnr21">21</a>. Freire, <i>Pedagogy of the Oppressed</i>, trans. M. A. Ramos (New York: Herder and Herder, 1970), p. 34.</p>
<p class="notesz1"><a href="chapter07.xhtml#ch07-fn22" id="ch07-fnr22">22</a>. Mari Evans, <i>I Am a Black Woman</i>, p. 12.</p>
<p class="notesz1"><a href="chapter07.xhtml#ch07-fn23" id="ch07-fnr23">23</a>. Ibid., p. 93.</p>
<p class="notesz1"><a href="chapter07.xhtml#ch07-fn24" id="ch07-fnr24">24</a>. Moltmann, <i>Religion, Revolution and the Future</i>, p. 79.</p>
<p class="notesz1"><a href="chapter07.xhtml#ch07-fn25" id="ch07-fnr25">25</a>. Langston Hughes and Arna Bontemps (eds.) <i>Book of Negro Folklore</i> (New York; Dodd, Mead, &amp; Co., 1958), pp. 252–253 (paraphrased).</p>
<p class="notesz1"><a href="chapter07.xhtml#ch07-fn26" id="ch07-fnr26">26</a>. Ibid., p. 71.</p>
<p class="head_n" style="padding-top:16px;"><b><i>8. Divine Liberation and Black Suffering</i></b></p>
<p class="notesz"><a href="chapter08.xhtml#ch08-fn1" id="ch08-fnr1">1</a>. See William Jones, <i>Is God a White Racist</i>? (Garden City, N.Y.: Doubleday, 1973). Building on Jones's important work, see also Anthony Parin, <i>Why Lord?: Suffering and Evil in Black Theology</i> (New York: Continuum 1945), and Edgar S. Brightman, <i>A Philosophy of Religion</i> (New York: Prentice-Hall, 1940).</p>
<p class="notesz"><a href="chapter08.xhtml#ch08-fn2" id="ch08-fnr2">2</a>. John Bowker, <i>Problems of Suffering in Religions of the World</i> (London: Cambridge University Press, 1970), p. 9.</p>
<p class="notesz"><a href="chapter08.xhtml#ch08-fn3" id="ch08-fnr3">3</a>. James A. Sanders identifies eight solutions to the problem of suffering in the Old Testament. See his “Suffering as Divine Discipline in the Old Testament and Post-Biblical Judaism,” in <i>Colgate Rochester Divinity School Bulletin</i>, Vol. XXVIII, (November 1955), Special Issue, Rochester, N.Y., pp. 1f. See also H. Wheeler Robinson, <i>Suffering Human and Divine</i> (New York, Macmillan, 1939); John Bowker, <i>Problems of Suffering in Religions of the World</i>, Chaps. 1–2.</p>
<p class="notesz"><a href="chapter08.xhtml#ch08-fn4" id="ch08-fnr4">4</a>. Fleming James, <i>Personalities of the Old Testament</i> (New York: Charles Scribner's Sons, 1939), pp. 533–534.</p>
<p class="notesz"><a href="chapter08.xhtml#ch08-fn5" id="ch08-fnr5">5</a>. For a survey of the vast literature, see Christopher R. North, <i>The Suffering Servant in Deutero-Isaiah</i> (London: Oxford University Press, 1948). For an excellent discussion of the theology of Second Isaiah, see James Muilenburg, “Introduction and Exegesis to Isaiah, Chs. 40–66,” in G. A. Buttrick, ed., <i>The Interpreter's Bible</i>, Vol. V (Nashville: Abingdon Press, 1956), pp. 381–773. Regarding the identity of the servant, Muilenburg says: “The servant is certainly Israel…. Israel, and Israel alone, is able to bear all that is said about the servant of the Lord. For the <a id="page_244"/>fundamental fact outweighing all others is the repeated equation of the two in the poems” (pp. 408, 411).</p>
<p class="notesz"><a href="chapter08.xhtml#ch08-fn6" id="ch08-fnr6">6</a>. For an analysis of the significance of the baptismal saying in relation to Isaiah 42:1, see <a href="chapter04.xhtml">Chap. 4</a>.</p>
<p class="notesz"><a href="chapter08.xhtml#ch08-fn7" id="ch08-fnr7">7</a>. See Mark 8:31f., Matt. 16:21f., Luke 9:22; Mark 9:30–32, Matt. 17:22f., Luke 9:44f.; Mark 10:32–34, Matt. 20:17f., Luke 18:31–33.</p>
<p class="notesz"><a href="chapter08.xhtml#ch08-fn8" id="ch08-fnr8">8</a>. See especially Acts 8:26–29; 3:13, 26; 4:27, 30; Rev. 5:6, 9, 12; Heb. 9:28; I Peter 1:19; 2:22–25.</p>
<p class="notesz"><a href="chapter08.xhtml#ch08-fn9" id="ch08-fnr9">9</a>. Burrows, <i>An Outline of Biblical Theology</i> (Philadelphia: Westminster Press, 1946), p. 88.</p>
<p class="notesz1"><a href="chapter08.xhtml#ch08-fn10" id="ch08-fnr10">10</a>. The most important exception is liberation theology in Latin America. See especially Gustavo Gutiérrez, <i>On Job: God-Talk and the Suffering of the Innocent</i> (Maryknoll, N.Y.: Orbis Books, 1985). Another important contribution is Jürgen Moltmann. See <i>The Crucified God</i>, trans. A. Wilson and J. Bowden (New York: Harper &amp; Row, 1974). See also his “God and Resurrection,” in <i>Hope and Planning</i>, trans. Margaret Clarkson (New York: Harper &amp; Row, 1971). It is to Moltmann's credit that he has endeavored to do theology in the light of the struggle for political justice.</p>
<p class="notesz1"><a href="chapter08.xhtml#ch08-fn11" id="ch08-fnr11">11</a>. Cited in Lactantius (<i>c</i>. <small>A.D.</small> 260—<i>c</i>. 340) “On the Anger of God,” Chap. 13, trans. William Fletscher, in <i>The Writings of the Ante-Nicene Fathers</i> (Grand Rapids, Mich.: W. B. Eerdmans, 1951), Vol. VII, p. 271.</p>
<p class="notesz1"><a href="chapter08.xhtml#ch08-fn12" id="ch08-fnr12">12</a>. Hick, <i>Evil and the God of Love</i> (New York: Harper &amp; Row, 1966), p. 5.</p>
<p class="notesz1"><a href="chapter08.xhtml#ch08-fn13" id="ch08-fnr13">13</a>. Ibid., pp. 220–221.</p>
<p class="notesz1"><a href="chapter08.xhtml#ch08-fn14" id="ch08-fnr14">14</a>. See Hick's discussion of Gabriel Marcel's perspective on suffering in ibid., pp. 9f.</p>
<p class="notesz1"><a href="chapter08.xhtml#ch08-fn15" id="ch08-fnr15">15</a>. Gabriel Marcel, <i>The Philosophy of Existence</i>, trans. Manya Harari (New York: Philosophical Library, 1949), p. 9.</p>
<p class="notesz1"><a href="chapter08.xhtml#ch08-fn16" id="ch08-fnr16">16</a>. Emil Brunner, <i>Christian Doctrine of Creation and Redemption</i>, trans. Olive Wyon (Philadelphia: Westminster Press, 1952), pp. 182–183.</p>
<p class="notesz1"><a href="chapter08.xhtml#ch08-fn17" id="ch08-fnr17">17</a>. Käsemann, <i>Jesus Means Freedom</i>, p. 13 (see <a href="notes.xhtml#ch04-fnr6">Chap. 4, note 6</a>, above).</p>
<p class="notesz1"><a href="chapter08.xhtml#ch08-fn18" id="ch08-fnr18">18</a>. “Negro Folk Expression: Spirituals, Seculars, Ballads and Work Songs,” in A. Meier and E. Rudwick, <i>The Making of Black America</i>, Vol. II (New York: Atheneum, 1969), pp. 215, 216.</p>
<p class="notesz1"><a href="chapter08.xhtml#ch08-fn19" id="ch08-fnr19">19</a>. W. E. B. Du Bois, “A Litany at Atlanta,” in <i>Black Voices</i>, ed. Abraham Chapman (New York: New American Library, 1968), pp. 360, 362.</p>
<p class="notesz1"><a href="chapter08.xhtml#ch08-fn20" id="ch08-fnr20">20</a>. From “A New Song” by Langston Hughes, cited in Jean Wagner, <i>Black Poets of the United States</i>, trans. Kenneth Douglas (Urbana, Ill.: University of Illinois Press, 1973), p. 438.</p>
<p class="notesz1"><a href="chapter08.xhtml#ch08-fn21" id="ch08-fnr21">21</a>. See Richard Wright, <i>Native Son</i> (New York: Harper &amp; Row, 1940).</p>
<p class="notesz1"><a href="chapter08.xhtml#ch08-fn22" id="ch08-fnr22">22</a>. See Baldwin's novel, <i>Go Tell It on the Mountain</i> (New York: Dell, 1952) and his essay, <i>The Fire Next Time</i> (New York: Dial Press, 1963).</p>
<a id="page_245"/>
<p class="notesz1"><a href="chapter08.xhtml#ch08-fn23" id="ch08-fnr23">23</a>. I am thoroughly sympathetic with William Jones's attempt to make the problem of black suffering central in Black Theology. But he is absolutely wrong in his assessment of my perspective when viewed from the methodology of “internal critique.” Anyone who reads my works can see that any theological problem (and especially suffering!) can and must be dealt with from the perspective of Jesus Christ. This may not be true so much for the other black theologians he treated; but for me, Jesus Christ is the essence of the meaning of liberation. Thus he is the decisive historical event beyond which no one needs to appeal. Of course Jones and others may not agree to the high place given to Jesus Christ in black religion generally and my theology in particular, but for Jones to ask about the “definitive event of black liberation” (p. 116, <i>Is God a White Racist?</i>) from the method of an <i>internal</i> critique, as if Jesus Christ is not a proper answer in my own perspective, is to misunderstand totally what he claims to be doing and thus to distort my perspective. Of course, from the perspective of an <i>external</i> critique, Jones's analysis is to the point, and Black Theology will have to contend with his persuasive arguments. I do not intend to debate with Jones about the validity of his claim of doing internal criticism. His critique of my position in Chap. VII of his <i>Is God a White Racist?</i> is so decidedly externally oriented, especially in his only slight reference to the function of Jesus Christ in my perspective (pp. 118–119), that I find it hard to believe that Jones believes what he claims. To do internal criticism is to think as another thinks and to criticize on the basis of another's presuppositions. In this case, Jones claimed to be thinking my thoughts on the basis of my frame of reference, and he concludes that my perspective on divine liberation of blacks from bondage demands that I produce the decisive liberating event. Apparently he has completely overlooked the <i>christological</i> orientation of my theology. “Christianity begins and ends with the man Jesus—his life, death, and resurrection. He is the Revelation, the special disclosure of God to man, revealing who God is and what his purpose for man is. In short, Christ is the essence of Christianity” (J. Cone, <i>Black Theology and Black Power</i>, p. 34). And again in <i>A Black Theology of Liberation</i>, I said: “Christian theology begins and ends with Jesus Christ. He is the point of departure for everything to be said about God, man, and the world” (p. 197). These statements are not isolated comments but are part of the organic structure of my theological perspective. Any casual reader of my theology can see that fact. Thus why is it that William Jones, an astute scholar, fails to point out the importance of Jesus Christ in my theology? I think it is because he was so involved in doing what he called “internal” critique, when in fact it was <i>external</i>. I am not demanding that he accept the Christian faith or my theological analysis of it. I am contending for <i>fairness</i>. See especially <i>Is God a White Racist?</i> Part I, and Part II, Chap. VII.</p>
<a id="page_246"/>
<p class="notesz1"><a href="chapter08.xhtml#ch08-fn24" id="ch08-fnr24">24</a>. Cited in Benjamin E. Mays, <i>The Negro's God</i> (Boston: Chapman and Grimes, 1938), p. 49.</p>
<p class="notesz1"><a href="chapter08.xhtml#ch08-fn25" id="ch08-fnr25">25</a>. Nathaniel Paul, “An Address Delivered on the Celebration of the Abolition of Slavery in the State of New York, July 5, 1827,” in Carter G. Woodson, <i>Negro Orators and Their Orations</i> (New York: Russell and Russell, 1969), p. 69.</p>
<p class="notesz1"><a href="chapter08.xhtml#ch08-fn26" id="ch08-fnr26">26</a>. Gayraud Wilmore, <i>Black Religion and Black Radicalism</i> (Garden City, N.Y.: Doubleday, 1972; rev. ed., Maryknoll, N.Y. Orbis Books, 1983), p. 160.</p>
<p class="notesz1"><a href="chapter08.xhtml#ch08-fn27" id="ch08-fnr27">27</a>. Edward Blyden, <i>Liberia's Offering</i> (New York: John Gray, Printer, 1862), pp. 71–72.</p>
<p class="notesz1"><a href="chapter08.xhtml#ch08-fn28" id="ch08-fnr28">28</a>. Cited in Mays, p. 49.</p>
<p class="notesz1"><a href="chapter08.xhtml#ch08-fn29" id="ch08-fnr29">29</a>. Cited in Woodson, p. 69.</p>
<p class="notesz1"><a href="chapter08.xhtml#ch08-fn30" id="ch08-fnr30">30</a>. “Bishop Daniel Alexander Payne's Protestation of American Slavery,” <i>Journal of Negro History</i>, Vol. LII (1967), p. 60.</p>
<p class="head_n"><b><i>9. Liberation and the Christian Ethic</i></b></p>
<p class="notesz"><a href="chapter09.xhtml#ch09-fn1" id="ch09-fnr1">1</a>. Vitaly Baroxoj, “Why the Gospels Are Revolutionary: The Foundation of a Theology in the Service of Social Revolutions,” in IDOC (ed.), <i>Where All Else Fails</i> (Philadelphia: Pilgrim Press, 1970), p. 65.</p>
<p class="notesz"><a href="chapter09.xhtml#ch09-fn2" id="ch09-fnr2">2</a>. Augustine, <i>The City of God</i>, trans. Marcus Dods (New York: Modern Library, 1950), p. 694.</p>
<p class="notesz"><a href="chapter09.xhtml#ch09-fn3" id="ch09-fnr3">3</a>. Cited in Roger Garaudy, <i>From Anathema to Dialogue</i> (New York: Vintage Books, 1968), p. 98.</p>
<p class="notesz"><a href="chapter09.xhtml#ch09-fn4" id="ch09-fnr4">4</a>. Cited in Roland Bainton, <i>Here I Stand</i> (Nashville: Abingdon Press, 1950), p. 280.</p>
<p class="notesz"><a href="chapter09.xhtml#ch09-fn5" id="ch09-fnr5">5</a>. See Edward L. Long, <i>A Survey of Christian Ethics</i> (New York: Oxford University Press, 1967), for an excellent discussion of these issues in Protestant and Catholic Christianity. A noticeable absence in the discussion is the black religious tradition, except for a brief discussion of nonviolence in Martin Luther King, Jr. This is particularly unfortunate, since the book was published during the black revolution of the 1960s, and since Professor Long teaches at Oberlin College, a school with a history of involvement in the black struggle for freedom.</p>
<p class="notesz"><a href="chapter09.xhtml#ch09-fn6" id="ch09-fnr6">6</a>. Edwards, “Racism and Christian Ethics in America,” <i>Kagallete</i>, Winter 1971.</p>
<p class="notesz"><a href="chapter09.xhtml#ch09-fn7" id="ch09-fnr7">7</a>. Cited in ibid., p. 19.</p>
<p class="notesz"><a href="chapter09.xhtml#ch09-fn8" id="ch09-fnr8">8</a>. Ramsey, <i>Christian Ethics and the Sit-in</i> (New York: Association Press, 1961), pp. 48–49. Also cited in Edwards, op. cit., p. 20. One significant exception is Robert McAfee Brown, <i>Religion and Violence</i> (Philadelphia: Westminster Press, 1973).</p>
<a id="page_247"/>
<p class="notesz"><a href="chapter09.xhtml#ch09-fn9" id="ch09-fnr9">9</a>. Lehmann, <i>Ethics in a Christian Context</i> (New York: Harper &amp; Row, 1963), p. 104.</p>
<p class="notesz1"><a href="chapter09.xhtml#ch09-fn10" id="ch09-fnr10">10</a>. In <i>The Harvard Theological Review</i>, Vol. 65, No. 4 (October 1972), pp. 485, 488. Italics added.</p>
<p class="notesz1"><a href="chapter09.xhtml#ch09-fn11" id="ch09-fnr11">11</a>. Hughes and Bontemps (eds.), <i>Book of Negro Folklore</i> (New York: Dodd, Mead, 1958), p. 13.</p>
<p class="notesz1"><a href="chapter09.xhtml#ch09-fn12" id="ch09-fnr12">12</a>. Williams, “James Cone and the Problem of the Black Ethic,” <i>Harvard Theo. Review</i>, p. 485.</p>
<p class="notesz1"><a href="chapter09.xhtml#ch09-fn13" id="ch09-fnr13">13</a>. Hughes and Bontemps, <i>Negro Folklore</i>, p. 12.</p>
<p class="notesz1"><a href="chapter09.xhtml#ch09-fn14" id="ch09-fnr14">14</a>. Another misguided attempt at ethics in the black context is Major Jones's <i>Christian Ethics for Black Theology</i> (Nashville: Abingdon Press, 1974). As with Preston Williams, Jones's ethical principles, which he defines as necessary for Christian behavior, are derived exclusively from white academicians—none of whom are really concerned about the liberation of the black community. Practically every reference that Jones makes to my writings is quoted out of context. In two places I am so badly misquoted that it cannot be allowed to stand without protest. In the first, Jones writes: “To contend that God would identify with a struggle which aims at the ‘complete emancipation of Black people from white oppression by whatever means Black people, not God, deem necessary’ seems to commit God to man's way, rather than to commit man to God's way” (p. 72). According to Jones, the quote is supposed to be found in my <i>A Black Theology of Liberation</i> (pp. 33–34). But it is not there. Indeed the quotation is not found anywhere in my writings! Furthermore, for me to express the perspective that Jones attributes to me would be a radical negation of everything I have written.</p>
<p class="notesz1">A statement partly similar to the one Jones attributes to me is found in my <i>Black Theology and Black Power</i>. Defining Black Power, I said that “it means <i>complete emancipation of black people from white oppression by whatever means black people deem necessary</i>” (p. 6). When Jones <i>adds</i> “not God” in the above sentence, it is not only a misquotation that is hard to explain but a gross misrepresentation of my thought. I was defining Black Power over against <i>white people</i> by refusing to allow <i>oppressors</i> to set the limits of our fight for freedom. In later chapters of the same book as well as in everything I have written, I identified the black liberation struggle with God's struggle. By adding “not God,” Jones has <i>substantively</i> distorted my perspective. In Jones's analysis, the <i>overagainstness</i> in my thought is God and not white people.</p>
<p class="notesz1">In the second instance Jones quotes me as saying “Indeed, it is hard to read objectively the history of the post-Civil War black church and not come to an absolute conclusion that the ‘real sin of the black church and its leaders is that they even convinced themselves that they were doing the right thing by advocating the obedience to white oppression as a means of <a id="page_248"/>entering at death the future age of heavenly bliss’ ” (p. 91). This statement is not only out of context, but Jones's addition of the phrase, “Indeed, it is hard to read objectively the history of the post-Civil War black church and not come to an absolute conclusion,” attributes to me something I did not say.</p>
<p class="notesz1"><a href="chapter09.xhtml#ch09-fn15" id="ch09-fnr15">15</a>. See Lehmann, <i>Ethics in a Christian Context</i>.</p>
<p class="notesz1"><a href="chapter09.xhtml#ch09-fn16" id="ch09-fnr16">16</a>. Cited in Julius Lester, <i>To Be a Slave</i> (New York: Dell, 1970), pp. 100–101.</p>
<p class="notesz1"><a href="chapter09.xhtml#ch09-fn17" id="ch09-fnr17">17</a>. Cited in ibid., p. 100.</p>
<p class="notesz1"><a href="chapter09.xhtml#ch09-fn18" id="ch09-fnr18">18</a>. Richard M. Dorson, <i>Negro Folktales in Michgan</i> (Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1956), pp. 57–58.</p>
<p class="notesz1"><a href="chapter09.xhtml#ch09-fn19" id="ch09-fnr19">19</a>. Cited in Gilbert Osofsky (ed.), <i>Puttin’ on Ole Massa</i> (New York: Harper Torchbooks, 1969), p. 9.</p>
<p class="notesz1"><a href="chapter09.xhtml#ch09-fn20" id="ch09-fnr20">20</a>. Cited in William L. Katz (ed.), <i>Five Slave Narratives</i> (New York: Arno Press, 1969), p. 31.</p>
<p class="notesz1"><a href="chapter09.xhtml#ch09-fn21" id="ch09-fnr21">21</a>. Cited in Kenneth Stampp, <i>The Peculiar Institution</i> (New York: Vintage Books, 1956), pp. 86–87.</p>
<p class="notesz1"><a href="chapter09.xhtml#ch09-fn22" id="ch09-fnr22">22</a>. Cited in ibid., p. 87.</p>
<p class="notesz1"><a href="chapter09.xhtml#ch09-fn23" id="ch09-fnr23">23</a>. For an account of this debate, see the excellent book by Gayraud S. Wilmore, <i>Black Religion and Black Radicalism</i> (Garden City, N.Y.: Doubleday, 1972; rev. ed., Maryknoll, N.Y.: Orbis Books, 1983). Gayraud S. Wilmore and Charles H. Long, in conversations and writings, have done much to bring to my attention the importance of our African heritage in the doing of Black Theology. Since I am sure that my theological perspective is still too strongly influenced by <i>Christian</i> terminology for their taste, the debate must continue. See also Charles H. Long, “Perspectives for a Study of Afro-American Religion in the United States,” <i>History of Religions</i>, Vol. 11, No. 1 (August 1971), pp. 54–66. See also Leonard Barrett, <i>Soul-Force</i> (Garden City, N.Y.: Doubleday, 1974).</p>
<p class="notesz1"><a href="chapter09.xhtml#ch09-fn24" id="ch09-fnr24">24</a>. Cited in John Blassingame, <i>The Slave Community</i> (New York: Oxford University Press, 1972), p. 66.</p>
<p class="notesz1"><a href="chapter09.xhtml#ch09-fn25" id="ch09-fnr25">25</a>. <i>Malcolm X Speaks</i> (New York: Grove Press, an Evergreen Black Cat Book, 1966), p. 4.</p>
<p class="notesz1"><a href="chapter09.xhtml#ch09-fn26" id="ch09-fnr26">26</a>. Thomas Merton, <i>Faith and Violence</i> (Notre Dame: Notre Dame University Press, 1968), p. 3.</p>
<p class="notesz1"><a href="chapter09.xhtml#ch09-fn27" id="ch09-fnr27">27</a>. Jürgen Moltmann, <i>Religion, Revolution and the Future</i>, trans. Douglas Meeks (New York: Charles Scribner's Sons, 1969), p. 143.</p>
<p class="notesz1"><a href="chapter09.xhtml#ch09-fn28" id="ch09-fnr28">28</a>. Jacques Ellul, <i>Violence</i>, trans. C. G. King (New York: Seabury Press, 1969), p. 3. In this quotation, Ellul is not defending this viewpoint; he is explicating it.</p>
<p class="notesz1"><a href="chapter09.xhtml#ch09-fn29" id="ch09-fnr29">29</a>. Martin Luther King, Jr., <i>Stride Toward Freedom</i> (New York: Harper Perennial Library, 1958), p. 88.</p>
<a id="page_249"/>
<p class="notesz1"><a href="chapter09.xhtml#ch09-fn30" id="ch09-fnr30">30</a>. See especially Alan Richardson, <i>The Political Christ</i> (Philadelphia: Westminster Press, 1973). He writes: “The Christian faith did not come into the ancient world as a new ideology expressing the social consciousness of either an upper or a lower class but as the restoration of true human relationship as such, the relationships which the class structure of ancient society (like societies in other ages) had impeded or destroyed. It did not preach the solidarity of the working class (slaves for the most part) or recommend militancy; instead it created a society in which right relationships amongst human beings, whatever their social position, could be restored. It supplied a motive and a power which could effect this restoration, the love of Christ” (p. 71). It is hard to believe that such an astute scholar as Richardson could write this in 1973! Then again, he has been saying this a long time (see his article on the “Poor” in his edited work entitled <i>Theological Word Book of the Bible</i> [New York, Macmillan Co., 1960], especially pp. 168–169) as have countless other establishment scholars. What is so amazing are the blatant contradictions. How can human relationships be restored without changing the structures in which people relate to each other? On Jesus and violence, see also Oscar Cullmann, <i>Jesus and the Revolutionaries</i>, trans. Gareth Putnam (New York: Harper &amp; Row, 1970). For a completely different interpretation which views Jesus as closely identified with the Zealots’ cause, see S. G. F. Brandon, <i>Jesus and the Zealots</i> (New York: Charles Scribner's Sons, 1967). Most European and North American scholars reject this view.</p>
<p class="notesz1">Another typical statement of New Testament scholarship on Jesus and politics is found in Rudolf Schnackenburg, <i>The Moral Teachings of the New Testament</i>, trans. J. Holland-Smith and W. J. O'Hara (New York: Herder and Herder, 1971): “Jesus brought a religious message and it was from that message that his moral demands originated. Any attempt to interpret his preaching in any other way (as a criticism, perhaps, of the civilization, or as a programme of social revolution) is wrong from the outset” (p. 13). For a contrary point of view that insists on the <i>political</i> thrust of Jesus’ message but rejects Brandon's suggestion that Jesus might have been violent, see John H. Yoder, <i>The Politics of Jesus</i> (Grand Rapids, Mich.: Wm. B. Eerdmans, 1972). While insisting on Jesus’ nonviolence, he contends that Jesus was politically involved with the weak and helpless. Another important statement that takes seriously the sociopolitical thrust of Jesus’ message is Ernst Käsemann, <i>Jesus Means Freedom</i>. He writes: “The power of Christ's resurrection becomes a reality, here and now, in the form of Christian freedom, and only in that. That reality is opposed on earth by anything that stands in the way of Christ's freedom, and only by that…. Christ's resurrection means Jesus’ sovereignty, and such sovereignty becomes an earthly reality only in the realm of Christian freedom. The earth has no scarcity of lords, and they all demand obedience…. Christ differs from the other lords in that he effects freedom. He <a id="page_250"/>does not just call to it; that would be the law of which there are innumerable characteristic forms. <i>Jesus gives freedom</i>. That is what makes him unmistakably Lord and inseparably unites the earthly with the exalted Lord” (pp. 154–155, italics added). See also Peter C. Hodgson, <i>Children of Freedom</i>, pp. 36–62, for a similar analysis of Jesus.</p>
<p class="notesz1">Of course J. Moltmann, J. Metz, P. Lehmann, F. Herzog, and other “political” theologians have been placing a great deal of emphasis on the political thrust of Jesus’ words and deeds. What is needed is more biblical theologians whose consciousness is defined by the oppressed of the land so that the task and goal of biblical hermeneutics might be rescued from the hands of scholars whose consciousness is obviously limited by the ruling class. The Alan Richardsons and the Rudolf Schnackenburgs must be exposed for what they represent—the status quo! Whatever else the ministry of Jesus might have been, and whatever may be the difficulties in arriving at his true history, we do know, without the slightest doubt, that Jesus stood in opposition to the dehumanization of humankind in <i>all</i> forms, and especially social, political, and economic oppression. I am not prepared to defend the status of Jesus’ ministry in the community of the Zealots on historical grounds, but that historical uncertainty does not lead to a conclusion that he was indifferent to the political and economic plight of the poor. This point is the crux of my difference with the majority of white biblical scholars on Jesus; and I contend that it is a difference that is traceable to their ideological reading of the Scripture generally and the New Testament in particular.</p>
<p class="head_n"><b><i>10. Liberation and Reconciliation</i></b></p>
<p class="notesz"><a href="chapter10.xhtml#ch10-fn1" id="ch10-fnr1">1</a>. Tolson, “Dark Symphony,” in Abraham Chapman (ed.), <i>Black Voices</i> (New York: New American Library, 1968), p. 390.</p>
<p class="notesz"><a href="chapter10.xhtml#ch10-fn2" id="ch10-fnr2">2</a>. Williston Walker, <i>A History of the Christian Church</i>, revised by C. Richardson, W. Pauck, and R. Handy (New York: Charles Scribner's Sons, 1959), pp. 239–240.</p>
<p class="notesz"><a href="chapter10.xhtml#ch10-fn3" id="ch10-fnr3">3</a>. Aulén, <i>Christus Victor</i> (London: S.P.C.K., 1953).</p>
<p class="notesz"><a href="chapter10.xhtml#ch10-fn4" id="ch10-fnr4">4</a>. Karl Barth, <i>Church Dogmatics</i>, Vol. IV, Part 2, trans. G. W. Bromily and T. F. Torrance (Edinburgh: T. &amp; T. Clark, 1958), p. 501.</p>
<p class="notesz"><a href="chapter10.xhtml#ch10-fn5" id="ch10-fnr5">5</a>. Ibid., p. 499.</p>
<p class="notesz"><a href="chapter10.xhtml#ch10-fn6" id="ch10-fnr6">6</a>. Dietrich Bonhoeffer, <i>The Cost of Discipleship</i>, trans. R. H. Fuller (New York: Macmillan Co., 1959), pp. 35–36.</p>
<p class="notesz"><a href="chapter10.xhtml#ch10-fn7" id="ch10-fnr7">7</a>. Ibid., p. 79.</p>
<p class="notesz"><a href="chapter10.xhtml#ch10-fn8" id="ch10-fnr8">8</a>. J. Deotis Roberts, <i>Liberation and Reconciliation: A Black Theology</i> (Philadelphia: Westminster Press, 1971; rev. ed., Maryknoll, N.Y.: Orbis Books, 1994), p. 72.</p>
<p class="notesz"><a href="chapter10.xhtml#ch10-fn9" id="ch10-fnr9">9</a>. Ibid., p. 117.</p>
<a id="page_251"/>
<p class="notesz1"><a href="chapter10.xhtml#ch10-fn10" id="ch10-fnr10">10</a>. Ibid., p. 72.</p>
<p class="notesz1"><a href="chapter10.xhtml#ch10-fn11" id="ch10-fnr11">11</a>. See Chap. 6 entitled “Revolution, Violence, and Reconciliation,” in my <i>Black Theology and Black Power</i> (New York: Seabury Press, 1969).</p>
<p class="notesz1"><a href="chapter10.xhtml#ch10-fn12" id="ch10-fnr12">12</a>. Roberts, p. 23.</p>
<p class="notesz1"><a href="chapter10.xhtml#ch10-fn13" id="ch10-fnr13">13</a>. Ibid., p. 126.</p>
<p class="notesz1"><a href="chapter10.xhtml#ch10-fn14" id="ch10-fnr14">14</a>. Cited in Carter G. Woodson, <i>The Mind of the Negro as Reflected in Letters Written during the Crisis, 1800–1860</i> (New York: Russell and Russell, 1969), p. 194.</p>
<p class="notesz1"><a href="chapter10.xhtml#ch10-fn15" id="ch10-fnr15">15</a>. Alan Richardson, “Repent,” in his <i>A Theological Word Book of the Bible</i> (New York: Macmillan Co., 1960), p. 191.</p>
<p class="notesz1"><a href="chapter10.xhtml#ch10-fn16" id="ch10-fnr16">16</a>. Bornkamm, <i>Jesus of Nazareth</i>, trans. Irene and Fraser McLuskey with James Robinson (New York: Harper &amp; Row, 1960), p. 82.</p>
<p class="notesz1"><a href="chapter10.xhtml#ch10-fn17" id="ch10-fnr17">17</a>. Although Roberts revisits reconciliation in a recent publication entitled <i>A Black Political Theology</i> (Philadelphia: Westminster Press, 1974), there are few signs that he recognized the depth of the problem. See the chapter on “Liberation and Reconciliation Revisited.”</p>
<p class="notesz1"><a href="chapter10.xhtml#ch10-fn18" id="ch10-fnr18">18</a>. Cited in Sterling Brown, <i>Negro Poetry and Drama/The Negro in American Fiction</i> (New York: Atheneum, 1937), p. 64.</p>
</div>
</body>
</html>