<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>preface</title>
<link href="ebook_style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
<meta content="urn:uuid:5bf1d25e-4978-4604-b0f7-22d24fac0880" name="Adept.expected.resource"/>
</head>
<body>
<div>
<a id="page_ix"/>
<h2 class="toc_t1">Preface to the 1997 Edition</h2>
<p class="indent">Written in the middle of the 1970s, <i>God of the Oppressed</i> represents my most developed theological position. Building on my previous work in <i>Black Theology and Black Power</i> (1969) and <i>A Black Theology of Liberation</i> (1970), I sought to deepen my conviction that the God of biblical faith and black religion is best known as the Liberator of the oppressed from bondage.</p>
<p class="indent">This text was also written in response to black and white critics who challenged my interpretation of biblical faith and black religion. White theologians were disturbed by the militancy of black theology—the passion and anger that characterized its language about black liberation. They felt that I was influenced too much by the radical, separatist rhetoric of Malcolm X and Black Power and too little by the moderate, integrationist philosophy of Martin Luther King, Jr., and the Civil Rights Movement—which called upon blacks, whites, and other Americans to work together to create the beloved community. My affirmation that God was on the side of oppressed blacks in their struggle against white supremacy was countered with King's nonviolence and the biblical themes of love, forgiveness, and reconciliation.</p>
<p class="indent">White theologians and I read King and the Bible from different social locations and thus with different hermeneutical interests. We both read <i>selectively</i>—they from a liberal white dominant viewpoint and I from a radical black perspective of the marginalized. I was willing to acknowledge this hermeneutical difference and suggested that my view was closer to King and the Bible than theirs. But white theologians argued that my reading was subjective and ideological and theirs was objective and correct. Because we were unwilling to concede each other's hermeneutical point, dialogue between us was nearly impossible.</p>
<p class="indent">While most white theologians ignored black liberation theology, preferring instead to dialogue with Latin American liberation theology <a id="page_x"/>and feminist theology, a few engaged black theology in their writings, at conferences, and in academic societies. They were not put off by black theology's rage or its accent on blackness, for they realized that there was much justification for it. Still, these theologians pressed for the universality of the Christian gospel which could not be limited by the particularity of the black experience. I insisted that there is no universality that is not particular, no knowledge of God's revelation in the U.S. that did not arise out of the black struggle against white supremacy.</p>
<p class="indent">Black theologians challenged me from both a different and similar angle. Some questioned whether I had focused too little on the African origin of black religion and too much on the white theology I learned in graduate school. They claimed that my black theology was not <i>black</i> enough, that is, not attentive to the “otherness” of black religion, particularly as revealed in non-Christian sources. I acknowledged the need to pay careful attention to the African in black religion but not to the extent that the God of Jesus would be rendered marginal in black theological discourse.</p>
<p class="indent">Other African-American scholars felt that the politics of black liberation needed to be balanced with an equal accent on black-white reconciliation. In addition, they saw my theological ethics as arbitrary and not sensitive to rational debate and responsible conclusions. This black critique reminded me of similar criticisms by white theologians. I was not too kind in my response, because I felt that these black theologians were more concerned about not offending white oppressors than they were about empowering oppressed blacks in their struggle against white supremacy.</p>
<p class="indent">Another critique of black theology sought to undermine its central claim: If God is liberating blacks from oppression, why then are they still oppressed? Where is the decisive liberation event in African-American history which gives credibility to black theologians’ claim? There is no easy response to this critique, since there is no rationally persuasive answer to the problem of theodicy. Faith is born out of suffering, and suffering is faith's most powerful contradiction. This is the Christian dilemma. The only meaningful Christian response is to resist unjust suffering and to accept the painful consequence of that resistance.</p>
<p class="indent">Except for the incorporation of inclusive language, little has been changed in this edition of <i>God of the Oppressed</i>. It still represents <a id="page_xi"/>my basic theological perspective—that the God of biblical faith and black religion is partial toward the weak. There have been, however, significant developments in my thinking as a result of the gender critique of feminists and womanists, the class analysis of Third World theologians, and the challenge of second generation black theologians. Since I have written about these matters elsewhere, there is no need to comment on them here. There are two critical issues, however, that have escaped adequate attention: the Bible and christology, both of which are best understood in relation to continuity with my earlier work.</p>
<p class="indent">I still regard the Bible as an important source of my theological reflections, but not the starting point. The black experience and the Bible together in dialectical tension serve as my point of departure today and yesterday. The order is significant. I am <i>black</i> first—and everything else comes after that. This means that I read the Bible through the lens of a black tradition of struggle and not as the objective Word of God. The Bible therefore is one witness to God's empowering presence in human affairs, along with other important testimonies. The other testimonies include sacred documents of the African-American experience—such as the speeches of Malcolm X and Martin Luther King, Jr., the writings of Zora Neale Hurston and Toni Morrison, the music of the blues, jazz, and rap. Liberating stories, myths, and legends are also found among men and women of all races and cultures struggling to realize the divine intention for their lives. I believe that the Bible is a liberating word for many people but not the <i>only</i> word of liberation. God speaks not just one Word in only one Story but many liberating words in many sacred stories.</p>
<p class="indent">When we recognize the limits of the Bible, we can also recognize the problematic character of absolutizing any theological claim, including black theology's contention that the biblical God is the liberator of the oppressed. I first made that claim in the context of the black freedom movement of the 1960s and in opposition to a white racist church and theological establishment. I was convinced that the God of the Bible was on the side of the oppressed blacks in their struggle for justice and against white oppressors. While I still hold that conviction, I must wrestle now with contrary biblical claims and stories, especially the “texts of terror” that feminist theologian Phyllis Trible has called to our attention.<sup><a href="notes.xhtml#pre-fnr1" id="pre-fn1">1</a></sup> “The Bible, of all books,” wrote feminist critic Mieke Bal, “is the most dangerous one, the one that has been <a id="page_xii"/>endowed with the power to kill.”<sup><a href="notes.xhtml#pre-fnr2" id="pre-fn2">2</a></sup> No group in the U.S. has spoken more tellingly about the deadly dangers of biblical texts than gay theologians. J. Michael Clark confesses to “scripture-phobia”<sup><a href="notes.xhtml#pre-fnr3" id="pre-fn3">3</a></sup> and Gary Comstock offers no theological excuses for the Leviticus text (20:13) which condemns gays to death. “How many times and in how many ways do we have to be told that we should be killed before we take it seriously? Is not once enough?”<sup><a href="notes.xhtml#pre-fnr4" id="pre-fn4">4</a></sup></p>
<p class="indent">Using the Hagar story, womanist theologian Delores Williams challenges black theology's claim that the biblical God is always on the side of the oppressed, liberating them from bondage. God did not liberate the runaway slave woman Hagar but instead compelled her to return and submit to her abusive mistress Sarah. Native American theologian Robert Warrior makes a similar challenge by reading the Exodus and Conquest narratives “with Canaanite eyes.” The Exodus is not a paradigmatic event of liberation for indigenous peoples but rather an event of colonization. Speaking out of the black struggle for justice in South Africa, Itumeleng Mosala also questions black theology's idea of the “Word of God,” an ahistorical exegetical starting point which cannot be criticized and challenged.<sup><a href="notes.xhtml#pre-fnr5" id="pre-fn5">5</a></sup> The Bible was written from the perspective of the dominant class in Israel.</p>
<p class="indent">I share the concerns of feminist, gay, womanist, Native American, and South African black theologians, even though I do not always agree with their critical evaluation of my theological perspective. I have never believed that the Bible is above criticism or that it serves as an absolute judge in faith and practice. The black religious experience in the U.S. has a questioning tradition that goes back to slavery. Black slaves rejected biblical traditions which whites used to justify slavery—such as the so-called curse of Ham (Gen. 9:24–27), the story of Cain (Gen. 4:1–16), and the sayings that admonished slaves to be obedient to their earthly masters (Eph. 6:5–8, Col. 3:22–25, I Pet. 18–25, I Tim. 6:1–2, Titus 2:9–10, and Philem). They turned instead to the liberation motif they found in the Exodus, prophets, and the Gospels’ portrayal of Jesus in solidarity with the poor. Both the black church and black theology are products of that tradition. No experience can take precedence over the truth revealed in black people's struggle for full humanity. The same rule of faith should be used by all oppressed people as they reflect on God in their struggle for wholeness.</p>
<p class="indent">While we must begin our theological reflection with the particularity of our own struggle for justice, we should never stop there. The <a id="page_xiii"/>truth of our particular struggle pushes us beyond ourselves to the truth of other struggles. The Bible and the struggles of the oppressed throughout history broaden our vision of the truth and thereby impel us to make real the beloved community that Martin Luther King, Jr., spoke so eloquently about. Human beings are made for each other and no people can realize their full humanity except as they participate in its realization for others. While some critics, shocked by my accent on blackness, missed this universal note in my theology, it has been there from the beginning. The end point of my theology is as important as the particularity out of which it was born.</p>
<p class="indent">Turning to christology, I continue to focus on Jesus Christ as the starting point for Christian thinking about God. He defines Christian identity in faith and practice. Because I am a Christian, my theological reflections start with Jesus.</p>
<p class="indent">The Jesus about whom I speak, however, is not primarily the one of Nicea and Chalcedon, nor of Luther, Calvin, and Barth. Though the dominant western theological tradition is an important dialogical partner, it is not the main source for my thinking about Jesus. For christological reflections, I turn to the Jesus of Matthew, Mark, Luke, John, and Paul and of the Spirituals and Gospel Music, Fannie Lou Hamer, and Martin Luther King, Jr. This Jesus of the biblical and black traditions is not a theological concept but a liberating presence in the lives of the poor in their fight for dignity and worth. This is the Jesus I wrote about in <i>God of the Oppressed</i>.</p>
<p class="indent">Interpretations of Jesus are shaped by the religio-cultural and the socio-political contexts in which they are made. The christological perspective of this book emerged out of the African-American freedom struggle in the U.S. Since its publication, I have encountered many different perspectives on Jesus which have challenged and enlarged my christology. Particularly important are the writings of feminist, womanist, and Asian theologians.</p>
<p class="indent">My first encounter with Asian theology occurred just after this book was published. In May 1975, I was invited by Koreans in Japan to speak on “The Church Struggling for the Liberation of the People” and by Minjung theologians in South Korea to talk on black liberation theology. Though I saw many connections between the Korean struggles for justice in Japan and Korea and the African-American struggle in the U.S., the great difference between the cultures of the West and East and the minority status of Christianity in the latter made a <a id="page_xiv"/>profound impact on my theology. It did not take me long to realize that I needed to rethink my christology in the light of a nonwestern world inhabited by people struggling for justice empowered by other faiths. Later I became a member of the newly organized (1976) Ecumenical Association of Third World Theologians (EATWOT) and traveled throughout Asia, Africa, and Latin America, dialoguing with Third World peoples about the meaning of Jesus in their liberation struggles. More than any other group, Asians (especially in South Korea, India, and Sri Lanka) challenged the christocentric focus of liberation theologies. At the Second EATWOT Intercontinental Dialogue on “Christology and Popular Religions” (August 1995), David Suh of South Korea put the issue sharply: “How can we express genuine solidarity with people of other faiths in the struggle for justice if we hang on to the centrality of Jesus? Such talk is christo-fascist.” Suh was responding to the christological exclusivity of liberation theologies—the dangers of such terms as “uniqueness,” “finality,” and “absoluteness” when speaking of Jesus Christ.</p>
<p class="indent">Since 1975 a radical development has taken place in my christological reflections. No longer can I do theology as if Jesus is God's <i>sole</i> revelation. Rather he is an important revelatory event among many. God speaks to people through many persons and events in a variety of ways. While I find it meaningful to speak of Jesus as God's Black Christ who empowers African Americans in their fight against white supremacy, I cannot limit God's revelation to Jesus or to the fight against white racism. God's reality is much bigger than the black experience and the concepts black theologians create from it. No one people's language and experience are capable of capturing the full reality and presence of God.</p>
<p class="indent">When we truly recognize the limits of our experience without denying its revelatory power, we are then encouraged to reach out to others and connect with the transcendent in their experiences. The great problem with dominant white theologians, especially white men, is their tendency to speak as if they and they alone can set the rules for thinking about God. That is why they seldom turn to the cultures of the poor, especially people of color, for resources to discourse about God. But I contend that the God of Jesus is primarily found where dominant theologians do not look. On this point, Paul was absolutely right: “God chose what is foolish in the world to shame the wise; God chose what is weak in the world to shame the strong; God <a id="page_xv"/>chose what is low and despised in the world, things that are not, to reduce to nothing things that are” (I Cor. 1:27–28 <small>NRSV</small>).</p>
<p class="indent">Another important challenge to black theology's christology focuses on Jesus’ atonement—the question of whether God's salvation is accomplished in and through Jesus’ suffering and death on the cross. Some feminist and womanist theologians reject the biblical idea that Jesus gave his life as a ransom for many (Mark 10:45) or that God's salvation was accomplished in and through the death of the Son. They argue that such a notion of redemption can be interpreted as divine child abuse—the Father willing the death of the Son. This notion glorifies suffering and encourages the victims of injustice, especially women, to accept their battered lot as willed by God—just like Jesus did. They find nothing salvific in Jesus’ death and thus claim that the cross, as a symbol of salvation, must be totally rejected. The cross is seen as a symbol of disgrace, a shameful event that must never be passively imitated.</p>
<p class="indent">This is a powerful and persuasive critique of the Christian notion of redemption. No theologian or preacher can afford to ignore it, because there is too much truth in it. I agree with feminists and womanists who reject the theories of the atonement—ransom, satisfaction, moral influence, substitution, penal, etc.—as reflecting the God of patriarchy, the values of the dominant group. No one can deny that Jesus’ suffering and cross have been interpreted by religious leaders in all Christian churches to encourage the passive suffering of the innocent, especially the poor and women in all groups. Womanists and feminists focus on the life of Jesus in the Synoptic Gospels which inspires discipleship and encourages people to resist evil as Jesus did. Atonement theories, which image God as a Patriarch and Jesus as a passive surrogate, do not empower the oppressed to resist oppression but rather encourage them to accept it.</p>
<p class="indent">Both black and white churches are guilty of promoting passive suffering in the African American community. Black church faith focuses on the life, teachings, death, and resurrection of Jesus. All aspects of Jesus’ identity are important elements in its understanding of redemption. But the suffering and death of Jesus receive special emphasis in the songs, sermons, and prayers of black Christians. This emphasis often leads to the passive acceptance of suffering, which male preachers have exploited to the detriment of women.</p>
<p class="indent">White preachers and theologians have been particularly adept in teaching blacks to be passive and nonviolent—modeled after their <a id="page_xvi"/>narrow interpretations of Jesus and Martin Luther King, Jr. They elevated King to the status of a national hero, making his birthday a federal holiday, and recently helped blacks rebuild their burned churches. Even white conservatives of the Christian right, once fierce opponents of King and black churches, joined the bandwagon. Support for both emerges out of their interpretation of King and the churches as powerful symbols of love and nonviolence.</p>
<p class="indent">Black liberation theology was created by black theologians and preachers who rejected this white teaching about the meek, long-suffering Jesus. We called it hypocritical and racist. Our christology focused on the revolutionary Black Christ who “preached good news to the poor,” “proclaimed release to the captives,” and “let the oppressed go free” (Luke 4:18f).</p>
<p class="indent">Since whites have been the most violent race on the planet, their theologians and preachers are not in a position to tell black people, or any other people for that matter, what they must do to be like Jesus. This is black common sense theology, which is deeply embedded in the radical side of black religious history and the source out of which black liberation theology emerged. No amount of white theological and biblical reflections on Jesus’ cross and suffering will ever make me accept passivity as the appropriate Christian response to white supremacy.</p>
<p class="indent">Just as black liberation theologians’ critique of the white Christ emerged out of the social context of its fight against white supremacy, womanists’ and feminists’ critique of the atonement arises out of their fight against patriarchy. To understand either critique, it is necessary to know about the oppressive social realities that generated it. Christology does not drop from heaven. It arises out of life. The lives of womanists and feminists teach them the dangers of cross-teachings. As a theologian who knows something about danger from a black male perspective, I must listen to those who have the experience to see a particular danger clearer than I. It has been difficult for me to write and speak about the salvific significance of Jesus's cross since I read the powerful essays by Delores Williams, Joanne Carlson Brown/Rebecca Parker, and Rita Nakashima Brock.<sup><a href="notes.xhtml#pre-fnr6" id="pre-fn6">6</a></sup> They speak a compelling truth about atonement teachings to which male theologians and preachers must listen with the intention of being transformed. Unless we are willing to incorporate their critiques into our christologies and explicitly reject <a id="page_xvii"/>androcentric atonement theories, we become an accomplice to the church's mis-ogynistic behavior against women.</p>
<p class="indent">While I must listen intently to womanists’ and feminists’ critique of Jesus’ suffering and cross and be transformed by it, I also must listen to the voices of poor women and men, especially in the black community—past and present. There are always a diversity of voices in all groups and communities. Listening to black Christians, I am not convinced that Jesus’ cross and suffering are always negative for women and poor people, never empowering and liberating, and thus must be discarded. The evidence is ambiguous and complicated. While it is true that the cross too often functions to make the oppressed accept their lot as God's will, this is not always the case. Notable exceptions include the slave spirituals which are full of references to the cross and suffering of Jesus: “Were You There When They Crucified My Lord,” “Calvary,” “An’ He Never Said A Mumblin’ Word.” But, like black religion itself, the spirituals are also infused with <i>double meaning</i>, which Harriet Tubman used to liberate more than 300 slaves to freedom. Sojourner Truth, Fannie Lou Hamer, and other prominent black women were empowered by their faith to become passionate freedom fighters. Faith in Jesus’ cross inspired 50,000 blacks in Montgomery (1955–56) to boycott city buses for 381 days, risking their lives in KKK territory rather than ride in humiliation. This same faith sustained a Civil Rights movement for twelve years of intense activity with many suffering and dying in order that blacks today might experience a more just America.</p>
<p class="indent">There are many ordinary blacks who point to Jesus’ suffering as a source of empowerment in their struggle to survive with dignity in a world they did not create. I first observed this faith as a child in the lives of black women and men of Bearden, Arkansas. They affirmed their dignity as human beings against great odds as they held on to faith in Jesus’ cross—the belief that his suffering and death was for their salvation. For them, salvation meant that they were not defined by what whites said about them or did to them, but rather by what Jesus said about the poor in his teachings and did for them on the cross. They really believed that Jesus’ death expressed God's solidarity with the little ones—making them human in every sense of the word. This faith not only gave blacks an identity that whites could not take away, it also empowered them to resist, with all the power they had.</p>
<a id="page_xviii"/>
<p class="indent">Womanists and feminists are right to warn us about Martin Luther King, Jr.'s teachings on nonviolence, especially since they have been so grossly misinterpreted by the dominant white culture against black resistance. He spoke too often of black suffering being redemptive and was overly optimistic about nonviolence transforming white racists into behaving as brothers and sisters toward blacks. As King himself realized later, white racism is too deeply ingrained into the social fabric of American life for black suffering to eradicate it.</p>
<p class="indent">But King was right about the redemptive character of the suffering that arises out of resistance to evil. When one resists evil, suffering is an inevitable consequence of that resistance. To avoid suffering is to avoid resistance, and that leaves evil unchallenged. King challenged the power structures of evil. That was why he was killed. King's suffering, and that of freedom fighters around the world, is redemptive when, like Jesus’ cross, it inspires us to resist evil, knowing that suffering is the consequence. To resist evil is to participate in God's redemption of the world.</p>
<p class="indent">Though evil seems more prevalent and powerful today than yesterday, people are still resisting. Resistance creates hope. Just as Jesus’ resurrection was born out of his apparent defeat on the cross, so too the poor are born anew out of their resistance to suffering. The irruption of the poor is happening in African, European, Hispanic, Indian, and Asian communities in the U.S. and throughout the world. Their resurrection is the sign that God is at work in the world, raising the dead to life. We must join the resistance by making solidarity with those who struggle for life in the face of death.</p>
</div>
</body>
</html>