<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>preface01</title>
<link href="ebook_style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
<meta content="urn:uuid:5bf1d25e-4978-4604-b0f7-22d24fac0880" name="Adept.expected.resource"/>
</head>
<body>
<div>
<a id="page_xix"/>
<h2 class="toc_t1">Preface to the 1975 Edition</h2>
<p class="indent">Theologians do not normally reveal the true source of their theological reflections. They often tell us about the books that are similar and not so similar to their perspectives, but seldom do they tell us about those nonintellectual factors that are decisive for the arguments advanced on a particular issue. More often than not, it is a theologian's <i>personal</i> history, in a particular sociopolitical setting, that serves as the most important factor in shaping the methodology and content of his or her theological perspective. Thus theologians ought to be a little more honest, and let the reader know something about those nonintellectual factors that are so important for the opinions they advance.</p>
<p class="indent">In this book, I take the risk of revealing the origin of my commitment to the Christian faith; not for its own sake, but for the sake of the theology I seek to explicate. In previous books and articles, I have discussed the intellectual foundation of Black Theology and sought to show theologically that any analysis of the gospel which did not begin and end with God's liberation of the oppressed was <i>ipso facto</i> unchristian. In this present work, I do not abandon the intellectual search but simply integrate it with the existential and social formation of my faith as it was and is being shaped in the black community. I hope that this approach will not only help to clarify my perspective on Black Theology, but more importantly will help to join the black theological enterprise more firmly with the true source of its existence—the black community.</p>
<p class="indent">Without the assistance and encouragement of many people, this book could not have been written. Most of the material of this book was presented as lectures at seminaries, universities, and churches in the United States and on the continents of Africa and Europe. Although I cannot mention everyone, I must say a word of thanks to those persons who directly influenced the outcome of my labors.</p>
<a id="page_xx"/>
<p class="indent">I wish to express my thanks to Michael Novak and the Rockefeller Humanities Foundation for financial assistance toward the research and writing of this book. Thanks is also due to the Faculty and Board of Directors of Union Theological Seminary for granting me a sabbatical leave, thereby enabling me to devote a year of research and writing on this book. In addition, several of my colleagues at Union read all or part of my manuscript and provided helpful criticisms. They include: Paul Lehmann, George Landes, James Martyn, Cyril Richardson, James Sanders, Bobby Joe Saucer, and Roger Shinn.</p>
<p class="indent">A special thanks is due to Archie Le Mone, the Youth Coordinator of the World Council of Churches. Through his efforts, I was afforded the opportunity of making several trips to Geneva and other places in Europe, thereby enabling me to appreciate more deeply the importance of the Ecumenical Movement for the Church and its theology. I am sure that my subsequent writing will reflect more directly the significance of this experience. Thanks are also due to Paulo Freire who, along with Archie Le Mone, read my manuscript and spent many hours discussing it with me.</p>
<p class="indent">As with my previous writings, C. Eric Lincoln and William Hordern read my manuscript and provided helpful criticisms. I will always be grateful to both for their continued encouragement. I am also grateful to Gayraud S. Wilmore who read and discussed my manuscript with me.</p>
<p class="indent">A word of appreciation is due to the members of the Society for the Study of Black Religion. Because of the encouragement and critique of my black colleagues, I have been motivated to probe more deeply the resources of the black experience as a primary datum for the development of a Black Theology. Of course, not everyone will agree with my major theological thrust, but I do hope that this book will help to enhance our efforts to create a form of theological speech that is consistent with black people's struggle for liberation.</p>
<p class="indent">It is difficult for me to express properly my appreciation to Lester B. Scherer of Eastern Michigan University, my friend and former colleague. We spent many days wrestling over the theological issues in this work. He not only read the manuscript at every stage of its development but also provided invaluable editorial assistance.</p>
<p class="indent">As with everything I have written, my brother, Cecil W. Cone, has been an excellent critic and a strong supporter of my theological perspective. I will always be grateful for the many years we have spent <a id="page_xxi"/>together trying to discover Jesus’ relation to black people's struggle of freedom.</p>
<p class="indent">A special word of thanks is also due to my secretary, Ms. Babbie Mallery, who, in addition to her normal duties, typed my manuscript several times.</p>
<p class="indent">My family, Rose, Michael and Charles, continue to show unusual understanding when I am engaged in writing and research. I am deeply grateful.</p>
<table cellpadding="0" cellspacing="0" width="100%">
<col width="68%"/>
<col width="32%"/>
<tr>
<td style="padding-top:20px;" valign="top"> </td>
<td style="padding-top:20px;" valign="top">J. H. Cone</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td valign="top"> </td>
<td valign="top">Union Theological Seminary</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td valign="top"> </td>
<td valign="top">New York</td>
</tr>
</table>
</div>
</body>
</html>