<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>Holding Faith</title>
    <meta content="urn:uuid:e0000000-0000-0000-0000-000004415877" name="Adept.expected.resource"/>
    <meta http-equiv="Content-Type" content="text/html; charset=utf-8"/>
  <link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="../../stylesheet.css"/>
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="../../page_styles.css"/>
</head>
  <body class="calibre">
<h2 class="h1"><a id="page_140" class="calibre5"></a><a id="page_141" class="calibre5"></a><a id="ch5" class="calibre5"></a>Chapter Five</h2>
<h2 class="h2a">W<small class="calibre11">HO</small> D<small class="calibre11">ID</small> G<small class="calibre11">OD</small> C<small class="calibre11">REATE</small> U<small class="calibre11">S TO</small> B<small class="calibre11">E, AND</small> W<small class="calibre11">HAT</small> W<small class="calibre11">ENT</small> W<small class="calibre11">RONG</small>?</h2>
<h3 class="h3x"><a id="ch5lev1" class="calibre5"></a><em class="calibre13">The Doctrine of Creation</em></h3>
<p class="noindent">Life in this world is often described as a hodgepodge of good and bad. At the end of any given day, we might tell our spouse, partner, friend, or parent what went well and what did not, what raised our hopes and what threw a wrench in our expectations because it went so poorly. We might attribute the good things that happen to effective planning, great luck, or God’s blessing. We might account for the bad things by appealing to evil forces, or believing we are being punished for something, or reasoning that there is a certain amount of difficulty built into the world, and we sometimes happen to be in the wrong place at the wrong time. Whatever our way of making sense of the events of our lives, the idea that there are “good” and “bad” things that happen is commonplace. We might use other words; we might insist we understand good and bad more in terms of perception than reality; we might argue for the inclusion of gray areas that are, themselves, not all good and not all bad. The point is that we nonetheless immediately resonate when people describe their life circumstances in terms such as these <a id="page_142" class="calibre7"></a>because they reference the disparity we know is true to our common existence.</p>
<p class="indent">Many stories of creation also reflect our dualistic ways of describing our lives. They help us account for where we find ourselves. We can appeal to them to explain why it is that we sometimes witness and experience ugliness, violence, and suffering, and at other times enjoy beauty, compassion, and wholeness. They enable us to explore and formulate answers to questions we have, such as: Why is there suffering in the world? Are there good powers and bad powers it makes sense to hold responsible, or is creation subject to some kind of force that can be life-giving or can be destructive, depending on how we engage it? Or is there good and bad built in to all of us, leaving us do what we can to distinguish between them and evaluate their dynamics? How we think about these things influences how we expect ourselves to live and act as individual agents and how we structure societies in ways that both nurture the life-giving capacities and guard against the destructive propensities of their members.</p>
<p class="indent">In this chapter, we consider the Christian doctrine of creation and what it tells us about how Christian people of faith understand God’s relation to the created order and the character of creation itself. Interestingly, consideration of the Judeo-Christian creation story,<a id="rch5en1" class="calibre7"></a><sup class="calibre12"><a href="notes.xhtml#ch5en1" class="calibre5">1</a></sup> as it is found in Genesis 1–2, usually precipitates more questions than answers, when it comes to the matter of negotiating the ambiguities of this world. This is because, as we will see, it leads us to understanding sin and suffering as adulterations of creation, rather than as following naturally from it. And so we begin to consider also in this chapter the Christian doctrine of sin, recognizing how heinously it disconnects us from the glorious goodness of creation as we realize our salvation in Christ (<a href="chapter06.xhtml" class="calibre7">ch. 6</a>).</p>
<p class="indent">The understanding of what it means to confess God as Creator, as it is presented here, builds on the themes related to the doctrines of Trinity and incarnation discussed in part one. The God who creates us is the very same God who both enters into existence with us and who invites us to dance, together, in God’s own, triune life. How might we understand creation in the context of what incarnation and Trinity teach about how God meets us?</p>
<h3 class="h2"><a id="page_143" class="calibre5"></a>C<small class="calibre3">REATION AS</small> I<small class="calibre3">NTERPLAY OF</small> M<small class="calibre3">EETING AND</small> M<small class="calibre3">AKING</small></h3>
<p class="indent">The Christian faith holds that the God who meets us and claims us has always actually known us. When we say “God meets us” we are speaking not of a first meeting, but of a meeting in which one already knows the other very well, and the one who is well known might actually know the one they are meeting better than they imagine they do! God knows us and claims us, the Bible says, “before the creation of the world.”<a id="rch5en2" class="calibre7"></a><sup class="calibre12"><a href="notes.xhtml#ch5en2" class="calibre5">2</a></sup> The psalmist recognizes that God meets him in all places and at all times, even before and outside of time. This God who everywhere and even outside of time meets him also, in fact, made him. “You knit me together in my mother’s womb,” the psalmist says, marveling at this.<a id="rch5en3" class="calibre7"></a><sup class="calibre12"><a href="notes.xhtml#ch5en3" class="calibre5">3</a></sup> “My frame was not hidden from you when I was being made in secret, intricately woven in the depths of the earth,” he exclaims.<a id="rch5en4" class="calibre7"></a><sup class="calibre12"><a href="notes.xhtml#ch5en4" class="calibre5">4</a></sup> It is almost as if the psalmist recognizes his creation by God as taking place in the context of the divine embrace—as if he understands God to have met him even before he is made.</p>
<p class="indent">This idea that we met our Creator even before we were created is, admittedly, confused when we try to conceptualize such a meeting literally and in chronological time. Clearly, it seems, creation would need to take place first, before there could be the possibility of meeting. How could one meet another that does not yet exist? And yet even in human relationships, such out-of-order relationships seem to take place regularly. Consider these examples: A parent prays for the safety and well-being of her child’s future spouse, a person who has not yet been met. A kindergartener tells everyone, with confidence, that she has a little sister—even before her future sibling is actually conceived. A couple loves the child they will eventually adopt so much that the child actually becomes their own, even before that child is born, in another place, to a woman they do not yet know.</p>
<p class="indent">I have a close friend who hoped for a child for several years before actually having one. When she was packing up Christmas ornaments one year, during this period of time, I noticed she had printed hopeful questions and happy welcomes on several of the cardboard storage boxes, <a id="page_144" class="calibre7"></a>directed to her child who was not yet conceived. “Are you here yet?” she inquired. “Welcome to your first Christmas! We are so happy to have you with us.” It struck me, at this time before either of us had our children, that my friend had already met the one whom she would birth a couple of years later. She not only hoped that a child would come, but already loved the one who had not yet come. There is no question in my mind that these words, scribbled with magic marker on the outside of a couple of cardboard boxes, represented a meeting that participated in the making of the coming child’s life.</p>
<p class="indent">There are at least a couple of classic children’s stories that seem to follow this theme. In <em class="calibre8">Pinocchio</em>, the carpenter Geppetto, unable to have his own biological child, crafts a wooden marionette of a little boy. He makes the <em class="calibre8">marionette</em> by cutting and assembling pieces of wood, but the <em class="calibre8">boy</em> is made by quite another route—by the way of the father, Geppetto, meeting him and loving him as a son. He is made, through this tenacious meeting of Geppetto, a real flesh-and-blood boy.<a id="rch5en5" class="calibre7"></a><sup class="calibre12"><a href="notes.xhtml#ch5en5" class="calibre5">5</a></sup> Similarly, the stuffed rabbit in <em class="calibre8">The Velveteen Rabbit</em> becomes real—he is <em class="calibre8">made</em> real—by the habitual meeting of the boy who played with him, imagined with him, hoped with him, loved him.<a id="rch5en6" class="calibre7"></a><sup class="calibre12"><a href="notes.xhtml#ch5en6" class="calibre5">6</a></sup></p>
<p class="indent">In <em class="calibre8">Star Trek: The Next Generation</em>, the android Data is made—in the sense of being “put together”—out of highly advanced raw materials. But then he is met, and met again, by colleagues on the USS <em class="calibre8">Enterprise</em> who make him, though their encounters with him, into an actual subject—a real person.<a id="rch5en7" class="calibre7"></a><sup class="calibre12"><a href="notes.xhtml#ch5en7" class="calibre5">7</a></sup></p>
<p class="indent">This creative dynamic between meeting and making is probably best understood, analogically, in terms of relationships between beings. As many have noted, there is an “I” and a “Thou” that become who they are only in the context of the encounter between them.<a id="rch5en8" class="calibre7"></a><sup class="calibre12"><a href="notes.xhtml#ch5en8" class="calibre5">8</a></sup> But it is also evident in other forms of interplay. Artists describe themselves being met by ideas that demand they be realized by way of making. I once spoke with a sculptor who described himself as so overtaken by an idea for a project he had no peace until he actually made it. And so he searched for and found the perfect stone, working on his sculpture until he brought to life the idea that had met him. Interestingly, I noticed, the stone itself <a id="page_145" class="calibre7"></a>was at once both incidental to his encounter with the idea and critically important to it. The meeting between the sculptor and the idea was complete apart from the stone out of which the sculpture was eventually created, but without the stone being discovered and sculpted the meeting would also have been incomplete, since the meeting between artist and idea itself pressed for a concrete encounter.<a id="rch5en9" class="calibre7"></a><sup class="calibre12"><a href="notes.xhtml#ch5en9" class="calibre5">9</a></sup> To offer another example: In the movie <em class="calibre8">The Martian</em>, the botanist stranded on Mars figures out how to grow potatoes in order to survive.<a id="rch5en10" class="calibre7"></a><sup class="calibre12"><a href="notes.xhtml#ch5en10" class="calibre5">10</a></sup> He makes soil, he makes water, he creates heat, he constructs a safe place for the potato plants to grow. He has, in a very real sense, met and claimed those potatoes even before they come to exist. You can see this inextricable connection between creating and meeting especially well in the scene where the botanist discovers the first seedling pushing up from the soil. He gets down on his knees, gently cradling the stem between his index and middle fingers, palm up and just below the forming leaves. “Hello there,” he says, with joy and tenderness.<a id="rch5en11" class="calibre7"></a><sup class="calibre12"><a href="notes.xhtml#ch5en11" class="calibre5">11</a></sup></p>
<p class="indent"><em class="calibre8">Hello, there</em>, I imagine God saying to the creation God has made. <em class="calibre8">You don’t know it, but I’ve already met you and claimed you. You are mine, and I am going to keep on making you. I’m so very glad you’re here</em>.</p>
<p class="indent">A father takes his newborn child into his arms for the first time and says, “Hello. I’m your daddy, and I’m going to take care of you.” A teacher walks into a classroom to meet her class of brand-new students. “Hello,” she says. “Welcome to Introduction to Theology. I have the honor of helping you become theologians.” A director welcomes the audience to a new production, hoping against hope that they will like it, happy for even the most remote connection insofar as it undoes, and remakes, both the participants in the art and the art itself. Such meetings are miracles—they are made possible never solely by the “facts of life” that lead to the baby, the excellent pedagogical methodology employed in the framing of the syllabus, or the fluidity of the actors moving in and out of worlds, enlivening minimalist sets. In each of these cases, there is an entity created in the context of the encounter that did not exist before the literal meeting—the child born becomes a son or daughter, the roomful of students becomes a <a id="page_146" class="calibre7"></a>class, those gathered to see the production become an audience entering into the play of new creation.</p>
<p class="indent">The claim of those who hold faith, then, is more than that the God who makes us in the beginning then goes out of God’s way to meet us. It is more, also, than that the God who meets us then goes on to make us, offering us opportunities to be changed along the way, as we journey hand-in-hand, together. Certainly both the image of God traveling from a distance in order to be with us and the image of God meeting us daily as we journey through our lives hone in on the character of the encounter between God and creation: There is an “I” and a “Thou” that meet one another, and this “I” and “Thou” must first (and by definition) be distinguished from one another, if there even is to be an encounter, a relationship, a mutual claim, a subsequent transformation. But there is also an important synchronicity to celebrate, between the meeting and the making. The Word becomes flesh, entering into existence with us—and in this meeting itself there is making: all flesh is changed. The triune God acts, as Father, Son, and Spirit, and in these multiple actions creaturely existence is touched and transformed. The Holy Spirit “falls afresh” on us, “melting us” and “molding us” into new creations that can be “filled” and “used,” as the popular chorus says.<a id="rch5en12" class="calibre7"></a><sup class="calibre12"><a href="notes.xhtml#ch5en12" class="calibre5">12</a></sup> God’s creation of us is never accomplished at a distance from us, but always as the one who is meeting us, the one who is with us, the one who knows us and claims us.</p>
<p class="indent">This making of us by the God who meets us is something that is, of course, ongoing and that we always have in mind, in one way or another, when we reflect on doctrines including salvation, sanctification, and vocation—doctrines we will consider in later chapters. We will be able more fully to celebrate and participate in God’s everyday and ongoing making of us, however, when we understand it as a kind of continuation of what God has been up to from “the beginning.” When we are able to relate how it is that God is making us into “new creations”<a id="rch5en13" class="calibre7"></a><sup class="calibre12"><a href="notes.xhtml#ch5en13" class="calibre5">13</a></sup> to how God created us, salvation may be understood not as God replacing who we always before have been, but making a place for who God created us to be from the beginning. As we will discuss further when we explore the doctrine of salvation, the old that passes away<a id="rch5en14" class="calibre7"></a><sup class="calibre12"><a href="notes.xhtml#ch5en14" class="calibre5">14</a></sup> when we are newly created is not the <a id="page_147" class="calibre7"></a>oldest selves we are, but the sinful selves that have impinged on our being who God created us to be.</p>
<p class="indent">As soon as we begin reflecting in this manner, however, the tough questions of why we find ourselves so mired in that which is “not good” come rushing in. Reflecting on our own less-than-good behaviors or reading the daily headlines in the newspaper, we might doubt that creation is as inherently good as the Christian faith claims it is, asking: If we were, indeed, created good in God’s image, what happened that has left us, now, in need of re-creation? How could we who were created good and in the image of God possibly be so adept at <em class="calibre8">de-creation</em>?<a id="rch5en15" class="calibre7"></a><sup class="calibre12"><a href="notes.xhtml#ch5en15" class="calibre5">15</a></sup> That is to say: How are we so good at undoing what God did so well? What, exactly, went wrong?</p>
<p class="indent">These are, of course, crucial questions that must be taken into consideration. The trick is to remember, while doing so, not to set our created goodness to the side for the sake of making sense of our situation now. This might be tempting. If we claim we are not all good, but in some sense good <em class="calibre8">and</em> bad, it is far easier to explain why we do things that are <em class="calibre8">not</em> good. “There’s good and bad in all of us,” we say, sounding commonsensical enough. Disturbingly, however, what happens when we explain things in this way is that we inadvertently make a bit of acceptable room for the suffering of the world as part and parcel of what life is all about; we create an opening for letting ourselves and others off the hook for the ways we are complicit in causing harm and perpetuating injustice. “That’s just the way people are,” we might declare.</p>
<p class="indent">There is a lot of truth in this statement, descriptively speaking. A problem emerges, however, when we misunderstand these words as being <em class="calibre8">prescriptive</em> in addition to being <em class="calibre8">descriptive</em>. In other words, it is one thing to say that the creatures of the world, and the creation itself, has its problems. Similarly, it is one thing to say that human beings do, actually, sin. But it is quite another thing to suggest there is no way around the problems and the sin—that this is just the way we were created and almost, in a sense, who and what we were created to be. To say not only that there is sin (descriptively speaking) but that sin is necessary (that God prescribed things to be the way they are) is to compromise on our created goodness as well as the goodness of God. We are not all good, but good enough to be <a id="page_148" class="calibre7"></a>better than we’ve been, we might say to ourselves, by way of consolation and challenge.</p>
<p class="indent">By contrast to this, when we lay claim to the goodness of creation, as God made it whole and complete, we no longer have a ready answer to why there is sin and suffering. Unable to explain these things away, we begin to realize sin and suffering are even bigger problems than we had thought. They are, indeed, actualities that characterize our existence in this world. Their existence is, of course, problematic in the face of our desire to live full and abundant lives. But the very fact that they are not prescribed, willed, or desired by God makes them far worse, even, than they would have been if they could be interpreted as the necessary downside of a generally acceptable world. Calvin goes so far, in fact, as to describe sin as an “aberration.”<a id="rch5en16" class="calibre7"></a><sup class="calibre12"><a href="notes.xhtml#ch5en16" class="calibre5">16</a></sup> It is an aberration <em class="calibre8">because</em> it is the antithesis of what and who God created us to be; it is contrary to the reality of our created goodness. To describe ourselves as sinful and the world as broken is to grieve all the more because it is, in fact, unnecessary to be so. Not God’s intention. Not God’s will. Not God’s plan. Not who we are. Not good.</p>
<p class="indent">Reclaiming the goodness of our creation will mitigate neither our sin nor the brokenness of the world. It will, in fact, serve to underscore how awful these things are, compelling us to take a prophetic stand against them. In the context of recognizing and naming the troubled character of our historical existence, we may join hands with others who hold faith, resisting all that runs counter to God’s creative and redemptive intentions. We may work as Christ’s partners, by the power of the Holy Spirit, to reconcile and restore.</p>
<h3 class="h2">L<small class="calibre3">OOK AT THE</small> H<small class="calibre3">EAVENS</small>!</h3>
<p class="indent">There is no better way to reclaim the goodness that is God’s gift than to open our eyes wide and stand in “wonderment” in the face of God’s wondrous works.<a id="rch5en17" class="calibre7"></a><sup class="calibre12"><a href="notes.xhtml#ch5en17" class="calibre5">17</a></sup> Each of us should ask ourselves: When is the last time I contemplated the beauty and intricacy of the created world? I imagine <a id="page_149" class="calibre7"></a>that there will be a great range of ways readers answer this question. Some might say, “Why, it was just this morning, on my morning run!” For others, the answer might be harder coming. I myself am one of those people who might manage to take a walk and still miss out on genuinely contemplating creation, so caught up I can get in synching family schedules, grappling with the implications of something I just read about in the newspaper, or finishing a book chapter on creation and sin. Some of us need to be quite intentional not only about getting out into nature, but about making space and time to reflect on what it teaches us about who we are and who God is.</p>
<p class="indent">Whether it comes readily to the psalmist or not, she takes time to contemplate the glory of the world around her. “What are human beings that you think about them?”<a id="rch5en18" class="calibre7"></a><sup class="calibre12"><a href="notes.xhtml#ch5en18" class="calibre5">18</a></sup> she asks. This question spills over from her awe as she revels, before God, in her surroundings: “the heavens. . . . the moon and the stars that you have established. . . . the birds of the air. . . . the fish of the sea,”<a id="rch5en19" class="calibre7"></a><sup class="calibre12"><a href="notes.xhtml#ch5en19" class="calibre5">19</a></sup> she rehearses. I like to imagine myself standing next to the psalmist and peering up into the night sky with her. My bet is that standing outside and gazing at the stars was her habit, and that at an earlier point she asked a question that was even more basic than this one. I imagine the question being something like: Where did all this come from; or Why is there anything at all? Or, as philosophers have commonly put it: Why is there something rather than nothing?<a id="rch5en20" class="calibre7"></a><sup class="calibre12"><a href="notes.xhtml#ch5en20" class="calibre5">20</a></sup></p>
<p class="indent">This is the question I write on the whiteboard at the start of class, just as my introductory theology students are gathering to hear about creation. Some students wait with anticipation when I read it out, hands poised over their laptop keyboards or pen touching point to paper with readiness, prepared to write down whatever I will say next that they expect will approach an answer. Others look at me with eyes full of fatigue, wondering what possible use it is to bother with such a question, given that we’re here and have to find ways of moving through our days whether we contemplate our existence or not. Usually, I ask the students to put down their pens or override their weariness to consider the matter, just for a bit, even if it seems superfluous. To create space for such contemplation is to open ourselves to the possibility of transformation, to being the kind of people <a id="page_150" class="calibre7"></a>God can find,<a id="rch5en21" class="calibre7"></a><sup class="calibre12"><a href="notes.xhtml#ch5en21" class="calibre5">21</a></sup> meet, and make, I tell them. It is to be in good company with forebears in the faith such as Augustine, whose exploration of the question and its answers (as he describes his journey in his <em class="calibre8">Confessions</em>) leads him to convert to Christianity.</p>
<p class="indent">Why is there something rather than nothing? The answer, from the vantage point of faith, is short and sweet: because God made it. But its implications are profound, framing the way we think about just about everything, including how we interpret scientific discoveries about the natural world, how we understand God’s motives and purpose for creating us, how we negotiate an existence that seems to be characterized by struggles between dueling powers, and how we think about our own nature as <em class="calibre8">good</em>.</p>
<h3 class="h2">D<small class="calibre3">IVINE</small> S<small class="calibre3">OVEREIGNTY AND</small> E<small class="calibre3">VOLUTION</small></h3>
<p class="indent">Some people of faith find the assertion that there is something rather than nothing “because God made it” to be quite satisfying, insofar it seems to give us a way out of trying to navigate between theories of evolution and biblical stories of creation by affirming the sovereignty of God in the face of all else. For others, this answer might seem to be evading some of the pressing, modern questions that are before us today. After all, they may note (remembering Paul’s charge to “make your defense to anyone who demands from you an accounting for the hope that is in you”<a id="rch5en22" class="calibre7"></a><sup class="calibre12"><a href="notes.xhtml#ch5en22" class="calibre5">22</a></sup>), that there are debates going on all over the United States<a id="rch5en23" class="calibre7"></a><sup class="calibre12"><a href="notes.xhtml#ch5en23" class="calibre5">23</a></sup> about whether and how the stories in Genesis 1 and 2 should be included in public school curricula, and what their relationship is to evolutionary theory. Surely, they might insist, we can do better—as people of faith—than simply saying that creation exists “because God made it.”</p>
<p class="indent">I agree that the conviction that God made all things should never be used as an excuse for blocking ourselves off from knowledge or reflection. The truth is that this confession about how things began is not in all ways incompatible with scientific claims about origins, and can often work in tandem with them. For example, the fact that creation is here “because <a id="page_151" class="calibre7"></a>God made it” does not preclude the possibility that God made it by way of a Big Bang, as described by evolutionary theory. The study of evolution might actually deepen our appreciation of how intricate and beautiful God’s handiwork is. The doctrine of creation, in turn, might well supplement logical gaps in evolutionary theory. For example, the Big Bang theory might explain <em class="calibre8">how</em> there is something rather than nothing. But it doesn’t explain the why. My impression is that scientists are quite aware of this and that most do not see any need to go further back, in their explanations, then to the Big Bang itself. They have plenty to study and engage, certainly, from that point forward! Still, there are some who do want to pursue the question of <em class="calibre8">why</em> there is something rather than nothing, and these might find the Judeo-Christian answer to the question interesting.</p>
<p class="indent">Some scientists, along these lines, have hypothesized that there is something “unstable” about nothingness, itself.<a id="rch5en24" class="calibre7"></a><sup class="calibre12"><a href="notes.xhtml#ch5en24" class="calibre5">24</a></sup> People of faith might find this thesis interesting to engage, insofar as it seems, in ways, commensurate with the idea that God is intrinsically driven to commune with others because God is, in God’s own triune life, already a community. Clearly, describing God as unstable would be problematic because it would seem to compromise God’s sovereign character and steadfast love. But to think of God acting freely, in creating—and to understand this free exercise of creating as an act that manifests God’s being, as Father, Son, and Holy Spirit in relation, is to present God not as unstable, but as utterly consistent. It is not God, but nothingness, that is unstable. It is destabilized by the God who is eternally about relationships and ever about “something” that requires meeting, dancing, indwelling, affecting. So, again, there might be some interesting ways willing theologians and scientists could talk with each other about these issues that matter so keenly to them both.<a id="rch5en25" class="calibre7"></a><sup class="calibre12"><a href="notes.xhtml#ch5en25" class="calibre5">25</a></sup></p>
<p class="indent">Those people of faith who would rather not engage in conversation with the hard sciences about matters related to creation still have plenty to think about, after asserting that there is “something, rather than nothing. . . . because God made it.” Why did God bother creating, Christians often ask, if God is self-sufficient and has no needs? Why did God create a world so prone to sin and brokenness?</p>
<h3 class="h2"><a id="page_152" class="calibre5"></a>T<small class="calibre3">HE</small> D<small class="calibre3">IVINE</small> S<small class="calibre3">OVEREIGNTY AND THE</small> D<small class="calibre3">IVINE</small> M<small class="calibre3">OTIVE</small></h3>
<p class="indent">In relation to the very common question about why a sovereign God would bother creating, trinitarian insight is again quite helpful. Instead of moving from whatever ideas we have about what the divine self-sufficiency means to trying to understand how creation fits this understanding, we would do better to begin by thoughtfully attending to God’s acts (Consider “the work of God’s fingers!”<a id="rch5en26" class="calibre7"></a><sup class="calibre12"><a href="notes.xhtml#ch5en26" class="calibre5">26</a></sup> Meditate on God’s wondrous works!<a id="rch5en27" class="calibre7"></a><sup class="calibre12"><a href="notes.xhtml#ch5en27" class="calibre5">27</a></sup>) and then thinking about what God’s acts have to tell us about God’s character. After all, people of faith believe, what God does is always consistent with who God is, because God is perfectly free. The very practical gift to us, in this, is that we can look at what God has done, concretely, and learn things that are true about who God is (even though they never exhaust who God is). When we consider the character of God by way of meditating on God’s wondrous, creative works, we would do well to note that, whatever it means to say that God is self-sufficient, the definition must take into account God’s meeting us in the making of “each little flower that blossoms; each little bird that sings.”<a id="rch5en28" class="calibre7"></a><sup class="calibre12"><a href="notes.xhtml#ch5en28" class="calibre5">28</a></sup> The doctrine of the Trinity is, again, helpful here because it shows that being in relation is not something extrinsic to the divine life, but who God actually is. Explaining why God would bother creating is only an issue when the creating is seen as something inconsistent with God, something God goes out of God’s way to do. When God is known as three-in-one and one-in-three, God’s creating is not assumed to be a bother, but understood to be a free expression of God’s own (relational, dynamic, eternally-meeting-us) self.</p>
<p class="indent">God’s motive for making us, then, was not to have something to do with all God’s free time, or to show off God’s power, or to have sentient beings with whom to be in fellowship. God made us, in a sense, because God had already met us in God’s own, eternal life. God made us to make us, the way an artist creates art for its own sake—not in order to impress, or even to express who the artist is. The art that is created <em class="calibre8">does</em> impress, and it does express, but the artist’s motive for making the art is inseparable from the making itself. When the creative work of the artist is so much <a id="page_153" class="calibre7"></a>in continuity with who the artist is that the “why are you making that?” question seems redundant or even absurd, there we witness freedom. And the artist that is free in this sense mimics the artistry of the Creator God who always creates in continuity with God’s very self.<a id="rch5en29" class="calibre7"></a><sup class="calibre12"><a href="notes.xhtml#ch5en29" class="calibre5">29</a></sup></p>
<h3 class="h2">S<small class="calibre3">OVEREIGN</small> C<small class="calibre3">REATOR</small>, B<small class="calibre3">ROKEN</small> W<small class="calibre3">ORLD</small></h3>
<p class="indent">The question of why the sovereign God created the world with the capacity for brokenness and sin haunts any discussion of the doctrine of creation. This is, most people of faith will agree, a question that has never been satisfactorily answered and likely never will be. Calvin, frustrated with people who ask this question not only because he can’t answer it but also because he thinks it distracts from reflection on more important spiritual matters, is known for reminding questioners that “God created hell for those who engage in idle speculation.”<a id="rch5en30" class="calibre7"></a><sup class="calibre12"><a href="notes.xhtml#ch5en30" class="calibre5">30</a></sup> Contemporary theologian Moltmann, counseling people who demand answers to the unanswerable, frequently explains that we cannot know the answer to the “why” question. But we can know the answer to “where.”<a id="rch5en31" class="calibre7"></a><sup class="calibre12"><a href="notes.xhtml#ch5en31" class="calibre5">31</a></sup> As reasonable as Moltmann’s redirection of the question is, it does not remove our compulsion to ask why. This is for good theological reasons: if we have accepted that God is both good and sovereign, it seems logical to us that such a God had to have been capable of creating a better world than the one we know.</p>
<p class="indent">This problem of sin and brokenness comes up any time we stand in wonder before God’s beautiful creation. How can we help but be completely brokenhearted when we witness creation as it really is? This whole world, teeming with life, brimming with food, humming with harmonies, bent eagerly toward possibilities—this is the character of the real world, as God made it in creation and as it exists, whole and complete, in the eternal reality of the kin-dom. Glimpsing again this reality, in the course of our contemplation, we become even more chagrined at the actuality, insofar as it is characterized by dehumanizing forces, a paucity of resources, constant <a id="page_154" class="calibre7"></a>conflict, and stymying hopelessness. God’s ongoing creative work, people of faith believe, is to get the actuality of our historical existence more in tune with the reality of God’s creative and redemptive will.</p>
<h3 class="h2">R<small class="calibre3">ECLAIMING</small> O<small class="calibre3">UR</small> C<small class="calibre3">REATED</small> “G<small class="calibre3">OOD</small>”-<small class="calibre3">NESS</small></h3>
<p class="indent">In the beginning, the Christian faith teaches, God created us good. The word <em class="calibre8">good</em> is used liberally in the creation story in Genesis 1–2, along with “not good,” but then “very good,” used in relation to human beings.</p>
<p class="indent">The idea that creation is good is, actually, a fairly radical one, from the vantage point of twenty-first-century American culture. Not that we think of human beings as bad, exactly. But, as we discussed in the preceding chapter, we tend to think of ourselves and one another as “not all good, not all bad.” The sense seems to be that this <em class="calibre8">dual nature</em> we recognize in ourselves is, somehow, our default setting—the way we were put together. Often it seems to be accounted for, vaguely or explicitly, by reference to the evolutionary process. We all have the instinct to survive, as members of the animal kingdom. That instinct is understandable, to a point, serving to justify certain more selfish behaviors, even when they are engaged at a cost to others. But it becomes a problem when significant harm is done.<a id="rch5en32" class="calibre7"></a><sup class="calibre12"><a href="notes.xhtml#ch5en32" class="calibre5">32</a></sup> The goal of noting that people are both bad and good seems to be to foster awareness of the dynamic, so we can work to fan the good into flame.</p>
<p class="indent">The idea that there is some good and some bad in all of us makes a great deal of sense, when seen as a way to understand how the world works. After all, we read the newspaper and see violence and lies, deceptions and abuse. But we also see people demonstrating kindness. The same thing is true when we go through our days—there are those who do damage for seemingly no reason, and those who go out of their way to be helpful even when it is not clear they receive any immediate benefit for doing so. The not-good things that surround us, it would seem, would be well explained by positing that there are ambiguities in the fabric of creation itself.</p>
<p class="indent"><a id="page_155" class="calibre7"></a>This is the tack taken by some creation narratives. Often, these stories feature multiple gods, goddesses, and other powerful beings who might have varied motives for acting the ways they do. These motives are often associated, as they generally are for we human beings in this world, with having a certain sense of entitlement and/or desire for power over another. In the story of the <em class="calibre8">Enuma Elish</em>, a Babylonian creation myth written during the same time period as the book of Genesis, the world is formed in a context characterized by violence associated with struggles for dominance. Eventually the world and the sky are formed out of the body of Tiamat, a goddess associated with salt water who has birthed many gods, but who—in the course of trying to avenge the death of her first husband, Apsu—has come to represent chaos and danger, even taking on the form of a sea monster. The ruling god, Marduk, goes on to murder Tiamat’s second husband, Kingu, forming human beings out of Kingu’s blood.<a id="rch5en33" class="calibre7"></a><sup class="calibre12"><a href="notes.xhtml#ch5en33" class="calibre5">33</a></sup> Human beings, like the world they inhabit, are, in this story, made from materials that might not be all “bad,” in and of themselves, but that certainly are not “all good” either. Given the range of human behaviors evident in the course of history as well as in any day’s newspaper, the narrative of the <em class="calibre8">Enuma Elish</em> has significant explanatory power.<a id="rch5en34" class="calibre7"></a><sup class="calibre12"><a href="notes.xhtml#ch5en34" class="calibre5">34</a></sup></p>
<p class="indent">This is not true of the creation stories in Genesis, where all the emphasis on goodness might lead us to look elsewhere for stories more connected to the brokenness of our actual lives. The heavens and the earth are not made out of broken bodies, but by way of the command of the Creator God, who speaks a word and makes it so. Traditionally, the Christian tradition has emphasized that there was no chance of anything being compromised in the raw materials used by God in the making, since God created anything and everything <em class="calibre8">ex nihilo</em> (out of nothing) to begin with. Augustine, again in his <em class="calibre8">Confessions</em>, puts great emphasis on the idea that, since God is good, and God created everything–and God created everything <em class="calibre8">ex nihilo</em>–everything God created has to be good, in its substance.<a id="rch5en35" class="calibre7"></a><sup class="calibre12"><a href="notes.xhtml#ch5en35" class="calibre5">35</a></sup> The question again comes rushing in: Where did all the brokenness come from, if God made everything good? But another question, and one that will be helpful to address before considering the matter of our brokenness head on, is: Why did Augustine, and so many people of faith who <a id="page_156" class="calibre7"></a>followed him in the course of Christian history, see confession of the creation <em class="calibre8">ex nihilo</em> not only as an important idea, philosophically speaking, but also as beneficial to our lives of faith?</p>
<p class="indent">The short answer to this question is that people of faith have consistently seen the church’s teachings about creation <em class="calibre8">ex nihilo</em> as inextricably intertwined with the affirmation of creation as good, and therefore with the recognition that we, as creatures, are ourselves “good,” despite our obvious shortcomings and sin. Here, roughly, is the logic many of our forebears employed that connected the idea of creation <em class="calibre8">ex nihilo</em> with the affirmation of the created goodness:<a id="rch5en36" class="calibre7"></a><sup class="calibre12"><a href="notes.xhtml#ch5en36" class="calibre5">36</a></sup></p>
<p class="numbert">(1) First, they began with the Judeo-Christian confession that there is only one God.</p>
<p class="number">(2) Second, they affirmed that there is no ambiguity or capriciousness in this one God—God is, they held, entirely good.</p>
<p class="number">(3) Third, they posited that, because there is only one God, everything that exists must have come from this one God who made it.<a id="rch5en37" class="calibre7"></a><sup class="calibre12"><a href="notes.xhtml#ch5en37" class="calibre5">37</a></sup></p>
<p class="number">(4) Fourth, they concluded that, because all things originated with the one good God who made all things, therefore all things are completely and wholly <em class="calibre8">good</em>.</p>
<p class="number">(5) Fifth, then, the confession of the creation <em class="calibre8">ex nihilo</em> simply and in one clean theological sweep affirms the goodness of creation by reminding people of faith that the one, good God made all that is, with no additives or ambiguities included.</p>
<p class="indent1">Some people of faith reject the association between the creation <em class="calibre8">ex nihilo</em> and the goodness of creation, arguing that emphasis on God creating “out of nothing” in fact disparages creation by imagining that God creates it from afar, in a solitary, nonrelational mode that avoids having to deal with any of the messy stuff of creation itself. There are worthy arguments being made for how it might benefit us to imagine that chaos pre-existed creation. Catherine Keller suggests, for example, that to think <a id="page_157" class="calibre7"></a>of God fashioning creation out of pre-existent chaos is consistent with understanding God is with us in relation to the messy, chaotic things of this world. Even more importantly, to think of creation as something that is in process is to be positioned to consider what we can and must do to contribute to its improvement.<a id="rch5en38" class="calibre7"></a><sup class="calibre12"><a href="notes.xhtml#ch5en38" class="calibre5">38</a></sup> Keller, Thomas Oord, and others point out, further, that to associate chaos and ambiguity with things that are negative or not good is problematic.<a id="rch5en39" class="calibre7"></a><sup class="calibre12"><a href="notes.xhtml#ch5en39" class="calibre5">39</a></sup> Such connections are founded in a less relational understanding of God that understands perfection in terms of God being unaffected by the created world.<a id="rch5en40" class="calibre7"></a><sup class="calibre12"><a href="notes.xhtml#ch5en40" class="calibre5">40</a></sup> Why would we want to imagine God creating by verbal command, from somewhere at a distance from the substance of the creation itself? Better to have God getting God’s hands dirty, so to speak—working with the chaos that is the stuff of our world. Such an image of God, Keller, Oord, and others have suggested, takes better into account traits that have traditionally been identified as maternal than does a God who creates <em class="calibre8">ex nihilo</em>. Like a mother who births and nurses; like a father who changes a diaper while heating chicken nuggets in the microwave while simultaneously telling a made-up story to an older child who is hungry for lunch and attention, so God forms and creates in and out of the beautiful chaos that is the stuff of creaturely existence.<a id="rch5en41" class="calibre7"></a><sup class="calibre12"><a href="notes.xhtml#ch5en41" class="calibre5">41</a></sup></p>
<p class="indent">Addressing the concern that the rejection of the creation <em class="calibre8">ex nihilo</em> leaves open the threat of dualism, those following in the trajectory of Keller and Oord are clearly not proposing creation by multiple gods. Rather, they are challenging us to think in a different way about creation, a way that does not try to account for the origin of the chaos that existed “in the beginning,” but rather accepts it as an indication that creation is a process that encompasses ambiguities indicative of life in this world. This more process-oriented approach<a id="rch5en42" class="calibre7"></a><sup class="calibre12"><a href="notes.xhtml#ch5en42" class="calibre5">42</a></sup> to the doctrine of creation does not concern itself with the beginnings and ends of creation as much as with the ongoing, collaborative work of creation itself. The question “who made the chaos?” that existed in the beginning is, in this flow of understanding, not an important one, except insofar as it draws us to participation in mystery.</p>
<p class="indent">Certainly, these critics are right that we mustn’t imagine God the Creator phoning it in—creating the world from materials so sterile they are <a id="page_158" class="calibre7"></a>unrecognizable in the context of our actual lives. The God who meets us in the making of us must be the incarnational, trinitarian God who enters into the messy beauty of creaturely existence (“the Word became flesh”<a id="rch5en43" class="calibre7"></a><sup class="calibre12"><a href="notes.xhtml#ch5en43" class="calibre5">43</a></sup>) and is invested in the dynamic vulnerability of life that is shared (trinitarian <em class="calibre8">perichoresis</em>). What we should not overlook is that those people of faith who have upheld and even shaped our understandings of incarnation and Trinity simultaneously insisted that God created <em class="calibre8">ex nihilo</em>. This doesn’t mean, of course, that they were automatically right in their assessment of how God must have created. But it does mean that we might learn something important by trying to understand how they reconciled their conviction that God is near with their understanding of the character of God’s creative work. Despite the fact that the idea God created <em class="calibre8">ex nihilo</em> is not self-evident in Genesis, these forebears in the Christian faith insisted the creation <em class="calibre8">ex nihilo</em> works in lockstep with the confession that God meets us and claims us. What led them to hold these convictions so closely, and what practical implications did they understand the idea of the creation <em class="calibre8">ex nihilo</em> to have for helping us live lives of faith that are, obviously, influenced by chaos?</p>
<p class="indent">A brief, beginning answer to this question might be: That our forebears thought the idea of the creation <em class="calibre8">ex nihilo</em> upheld the integrity of both God and creation. It reminded them, as has been mentioned, that God is not simply the most powerful of gods, but that the God Christians trust is without rivals; there are no demigods or devils that pose any threat to God’s reign or God’s promises. There is only one God, not many or many parts. It reminded them, also, that the creation made by this God is similarly whole and intact: free itself to act creatively without being bogged down by any elements derived from traumatic, violent, or otherwise damaging influences.</p>
<p class="indent">As a corollary to rejecting the creation <em class="calibre8">ex nihilo</em>, Kelly, Oord and others insist that we emphasize God’s relational character when we articulate a doctrine of creation. But are there any ways in which adhering to the creation <em class="calibre8">ex nihilo</em> can actually support and advance important values emphasized by process-oriented thinkers? Let me mention three possibilities. The first corrects the impression that there is a necessary connection between <a id="page_159" class="calibre7"></a>subscribing to the creation <em class="calibre8">ex nihilo</em> and portraying God as standing at a distance from creation. The second argues that, insofar as the creation <em class="calibre8">ex nihilo</em> upholds monotheism, it makes possible a critique of any and all would-be gods that would pull us away from doing the work of justice in the world. The third argues that creation <em class="calibre8">ex nihilo</em> actually promotes a relational understanding of God by positing a more immediate relationship between God and creation, and then between fellow human beings, than it is possible to have when there is <em class="calibre8">stuff</em> that stands between God and our very existence.</p>
<p class="indent">First, the idea that God created <em class="calibre8">ex nihilo</em> has certainly been used to portray God as being at a distance from the created order, painting a picture of God that overemphasizes the <em class="calibre8">divine transcendence</em> (God’s distinction from creation) at the expense of the <em class="calibre8">divine immanence</em> (God’s presence in creation). That is, it has been associated with a portrait of a God who is separated off from creation instead of standing with it and even in it, or at very least with a portrait of God who is first and foremost at a distance and only secondarily enters into communion with it. But creation <em class="calibre8">ex nihilo</em> need not be interpreted as <em class="calibre8">separating</em> God from creation. When understood more as <em class="calibre8">distinguishing</em> God from creation than as <em class="calibre8">distancing</em> God from creation, the creation <em class="calibre8">ex nihilo</em> actually makes it possible to envision God’s radical fellowship with creation. This is because distinction is necessary for relationships every bit as much as nearness is. Think about it: When two are utterly separate and at a distance from one another, there is no relationship, or at least no intimate one. But where two have lost a sense of where one begins and the other ends, relationship has also been forfeited. To be radically present to another is a wonderful thing, unless and until one’s distinction from the other is lost. Then the relationship becomes more of an unhealthy problem that needs resolving than something to be celebrated.</p>
<p class="indent">From the vantage point of our daily lives, then, this idea that the God who creates <em class="calibre8">ex nihilo</em> and who admittedly stands in clear distinction from the created order can and does enter wholly into creation itself helps us think more deeply about the character of all intimate relationships. Any good relationship will of course reflect a blurring of certain lines, emotions, <a id="page_160" class="calibre7"></a>and experiences as those who are partners empathize with each other and share the stuff of life together. But for a relationship to be healthy, it also needs distinction and boundaries. The fact is that we, as human beings, cannot truly be met except by a “Thou,” by one who is distinct from us however, much is shared. This is, in fact, the backdrop of Adam and Eve’s meeting: Adam looks upon the one so different from himself and is amazed at how much they share; it is their distinction, it seems, that allows him to celebrate what they have in common. “You are bone of my bone and flesh of my flesh,” he tells her.<a id="rch5en44" class="calibre7"></a><sup class="calibre12"><a href="notes.xhtml#ch5en44" class="calibre5">44</a></sup> Like the Son in relationship to the Father, they share the very same stuff even as neither one is the other. To uphold the creation <em class="calibre8">ex nihilo</em>, then, is to confess that we really have been met by the Other, in our creation. “You knit me together while I was still in my mother’s womb,” says the psalmist,<a id="rch5en45" class="calibre7"></a><sup class="calibre12"><a href="notes.xhtml#ch5en45" class="calibre5">45</a></sup> recognizing the Creator as simultaneously right there with him and clearly transcendent to him, knowing his days. There is something about the utter distinction of God that, in fact, makes God’s nearness to the psalmist all the more possible. The God who creates <em class="calibre8">ex nihilo</em> is the ultimate “Thou” who—unencumbered by any external metaphysical necessity or need—is ready to meet us in perfect freedom, carrying nothing along with Godself that can get in the way of being with us and for us. Clearly, the psalmist experiences the Creator’s distinction from him as part and parcel of their extraordinarily intimate relationship. The divine transcendence is anything but the opposite of the divine immanence. It does, in fact, give way to it.</p>
<p class="indent">Second, to affirm the creation <em class="calibre8">ex nihilo</em> is to have a reference point for condemning injustice. The idea that there is only one Lord of All, and that this Lord is absolutely not threatened by any would-be lords or rivals, has been drawn upon through the ages not only by those who are trying to justify imperialism, but also by people of faith seeking theological justification for taking a stand against it. Scripture tells the story of how Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego refused to bow down to power-monger King Nebuchadnezzar, for example, because they believed there was only one God—and the king was not that God!<a id="rch5en46" class="calibre7"></a><sup class="calibre12"><a href="notes.xhtml#ch5en46" class="calibre5">46</a></sup> Martin Luther, claiming victory in Christ, is rumored to have thrown inkwells across the room at Satan in order to remember that God has no real rivals. Barth invokes <a id="page_161" class="calibre7"></a>the sovereignty of God to argue that we are “always wrong” if we think our only choice is to be stressed out all the time.<a id="rch5en47" class="calibre7"></a><sup class="calibre12"><a href="notes.xhtml#ch5en47" class="calibre5">47</a></sup> And Jacquelyn Grant notes that “to claim Jesus as Lord is to say the white slaveholder isn’t.”<a id="rch5en48" class="calibre7"></a><sup class="calibre12"><a href="notes.xhtml#ch5en48" class="calibre5">48</a></sup> In none of these four examples is creation <em class="calibre8">ex nihilo</em> mentioned explicitly. But in each of these four a major corollary supported by the creation <em class="calibre8">ex nihilo—</em>that God has no rivals—is clearly in evidence. Only God is God—Nebuchadnezzar isn’t, the devil isn’t, our stress levels are not, white slaveholders are not. All of these, as well as all other would-be “gods,” are prophetically denounced by appeal to the God who is Creator of all.</p>
<p class="indent">Third, and something that is not often noted: to affirm the creation <em class="calibre8">ex nihilo</em> is to highlight the direct and immediate character of creation’s relationship to the divine. Creation out of something envisions God putting us together in a way that might be somewhat akin to Geppetto choosing the very best materials to craft Pinocchio. In such an endeavor, there might be no lack of love, attention, or self-sacrifice, but there would be something standing between the Creator and the created: that is, the constructive work of the creation itself.</p>
<p class="indent">We are most godlike, I think, when we glimpse what it is to create <em class="calibre8">ex nihilo</em>. We are not God, so of course we cannot create out of nothing. But there are times when, in our creating, we become so caught up in what it is we are doing we are lost to the details, including the materials we are using. This happens to me, most often, in the moments when I am lecturing and I get so caught up in the beauty and mystery of what I am talking about that I lose all sense of time, but more importantly, that I lose all sense of self-consciousness. This is very hard to explain, but let me give it a try: in these moments, what falls away is whatever ordinarily stands between the words coming out of my mouth and the reality in which these words participate. I (and the Holy Spirit, if I may be so bold) am generating or creating the words. I have studied the content of what I am saying, thought about how best to present the ideas, and have generally created an outline of the lecture that listeners hold in their hands. I have researched who my audience is, given attention to what I am wearing, and arranged for amplification so I can be heard. In other words, the creation of the lecture and the presentation of it is certainly out of <em class="calibre8">something</em>. But <a id="page_162" class="calibre7"></a>there are those moments when the something is forgotten, where there is a transparent, immediate relationship between me and the creation that is the lecture. In those moments, creation feels like perfect participation in something that is real. It feels like relationship itself.</p>
<p class="indent">This, I think (though I imagine it on a far greater scale!), is what is experienced by great artists. They paint, they sculpt, they compose with all kinds of methods and papers and paints and tools, but finally what they produce is not the sum of their raw materials, or even their materials <em class="calibre8">plus</em> something more, but actually something that is, almost, indifferent to the materials that give it expression. I imagine Leonardo da Vinci stepping back from the <em class="calibre8">Mona Lisa</em>, much as I have done, wondering at its goodness. I or others might comment on her enigmatic expression as a way of recognizing the mystery that is before us: <em class="calibre8">Is she smiling, or isn’t she?</em> Da Vinci’s question, I am guessing, would be even more basic. <em class="calibre8">Where did she come from?</em> he might ask, paintbrush still in hand, standing in wonder before that which he meticulously created, but which he recognizes—much to his surprise—has its own, discrete existence that transcends even his best efforts and highest hopes.</p>
<p class="indent">To claim that God created <em class="calibre8">ex nihilo</em> is to recognize God as an artist who is in immediate relationship to his or her art, relationship that is not mediated even by materials used. God is the artist who makes neither from materials that are outside God’s own self or are part and parcel of God’s own self, but from out of nothing. God is therefore able, as Creator, to be immediately present to what is made both because there are no raw materials standing between Creator and creature <em class="calibre8">and</em> because what is made is, as we mentioned earlier, truly distinguished from the God who made it.</p>
<p class="indent">What this means, simply put, is what we said at the beginning of this chapter: that God meets us as God makes us, and God makes us as God meets us, directly and wholly. What I have tried to add, in deepening this point, is the idea that God the Creator meets us and makes us as artists meet and make their creations, only (if you will) more so. To be a craftsperson or an engineer is a wonderful thing—it is to be someone who takes raw materials and puts them together into something beautiful that <a id="page_163" class="calibre7"></a>gives joy and/or that changes the way people live. To be an artist, on the other hand, is to be someone who makes use of raw materials in order to participate in something that is not bound to those materials. As artists frequently testify, they are first captured by an idea that they then work to convey or conceptualize by way of working with raw materials. Salvador Dali, for example, was taken by the idea that time marches on relentlessly, deciding to explore and represent this idea by way of melting clocks.<a id="rch5en49" class="calibre7"></a><sup class="calibre12"><a href="notes.xhtml#ch5en49" class="calibre5">49</a></sup> The assembly of materials serve, then, for Dali and for other artists, as invaluable portals into a greater reality they have already met. But artists know that any given work of art fails to capture the reality of what they have met, in all its fullness. That is why they keep on making works of art—Dali, for example, made sculptures and paintings of melting clocks throughout his life. Just as theologians shape and reshape the words of the theological tradition in order to better speak of God whom they have met but have never exhausted, so artists work within the limits of what they have ready at hand in an effort to get ever nearer to that which they have met.</p>
<p class="indent">To illustrate this: In <em class="calibre8">My Name Is Asher Lev</em>, by Chaim Potok, a young Hasidic boy who is an artistic prodigy wants to shade a picture of his mother, but is given no supplies to do so by the community that discourages his art. Driven to find something at hand that will move his picture closer to the truth, he uses cigarette ash he finds in a nearby ashtray. His mother is astounded when she sees he uses the ash to depict the sweat stains that were under her arms when she was rowing a boat. “Why did you do this, Asher?” she asks. “Because that is the way you look,” he replies, innocently. Asher uses what he can find to create art that facilitates participation in what is real.<a id="rch5en50" class="calibre7"></a><sup class="calibre12"><a href="notes.xhtml#ch5en50" class="calibre5">50</a></sup></p>
<p class="indent">Unlike any other artist, God’s creations are not approximations of some greater reality, nor are they attempts to imagine or participate in something beyond their inevitably inadequate material components. God’s creation is, in fact, <em class="calibre8">the</em> reality in which other artistic creations strive to participate. Creation <em class="calibre8">ex nihilo</em> reminds us of this. It insists that there is a direct, and not an indirect, relationship between all creatures and their Creator, God. It holds that the making of us does more than make <a id="page_164" class="calibre7"></a>possible our meeting of God; it reminds us that our making <em class="calibre8">is</em> the meeting. Nothing needs to be negotiated; creation is itself already in intimate communion. This is, I think, why creation is deemed “good” and “very good.” These declarations are not meant to imply that creation is perfectly quaffed, neat, and well-ordered. Where “all things bright and beautiful”<a id="rch5en51" class="calibre7"></a><sup class="calibre12"><a href="notes.xhtml#ch5en51" class="calibre5">51</a></sup> are existing—the flowers, the animals, the humans; the “birds of the air and the fish of the sea”—there is bound to be a kind of chaos. And if there is—and where there is—it is not lordless. It is, with the rest of all creation, made and met by God and therefore part and parcel of the “good.”</p>
<h3 class="h2">E<small class="calibre3">VIL AS</small> N<small class="calibre3">OT</small> G<small class="calibre3">OOD AND</small> S<small class="calibre3">IN AS</small> A<small class="calibre3">BERRATION</small></h3>
<p class="indent">All of this might sound, at this point, like a bit of a fairy tale. After all, the fact of God’s intimate relationship with nature is often far from apparent. Just a few moments ago my middle-school–age son looked over my shoulder, read a few of the preceding paragraphs, and said, “Mommy, you know what saying I don’t like, that we say in church? ‘God is good, all the time. All the time, God is good.’ What in the world does that <em class="calibre8">mean</em>, Mommy, when so many bad things happen in the world?”</p>
<p class="indent">Exactly the question we all have. Once we say that everything that exists is good because it was created by a good God out of nothing, it might seem difficult (perhaps impossible) to explain why and how there is so much that is <em class="calibre8">not</em> good. It is so difficult, in fact, and the pressure to account for suffering so great, that we wind up adjusting to account for the seeming discrepancy between what we claim about God and God’s creation and the problematic things that are in evidence all around us. We might assert, given God’s sovereignty and goodness, that things can’t be as bad as they seem.<a id="rch5en52" class="calibre7"></a><sup class="calibre12"><a href="notes.xhtml#ch5en52" class="calibre5">52</a></sup> Or we might conclude, given the depths of the world’s suffering, that God is not as powerful as we may have thought; perhaps God “cannot do everything.”<a id="rch5en53" class="calibre7"></a><sup class="calibre12"><a href="notes.xhtml#ch5en53" class="calibre5">53</a></sup> Or perhaps God is not altogether good,<a id="rch5en54" class="calibre7"></a><sup class="calibre12"><a href="notes.xhtml#ch5en54" class="calibre5">54</a></sup> creating us with flaws that have to be navigated. The problem with any and all of these “solutions” to the problem of suffering is that they set aside <a id="page_165" class="calibre7"></a>the promise of creation—that God makes us and meets us, wholly good and perfectly present. In Genesis, as we have said, this utter goodness is emphasized, and God is present in our midst, walking in the Garden. When sin enters the story, it is viewed as an aberration and adulteration, utterly inconsistent with what God has made, what God desires, and what God intends.</p>
<p class="indent">There is a way, however, of accounting for the suffering of the world without compromising on the goodness of either God or creation. Augustine got at it by asking (after affirming the goodness of creation as made by the good and singular God): Then where did <em class="calibre8">evil</em> come from? Augustine recognized that he could posit neither that evil was made by God nor that it was made by one other than God without running into theological difficulties. He struggled to find another response to the problem and finally arrived at what has ever since been a defining way theologians have framed evil and sin. What approach did Augustine take?</p>
<p class="indent">Augustine’s brilliant solution to the dilemma of how to account for suffering in the face of the created goodness is to define evil as “the absence of good.”<a id="rch5en55" class="calibre7"></a><sup class="calibre12"><a href="notes.xhtml#ch5en55" class="calibre5">55</a></sup> Evil has no substance, he argues. It was not created. It could not have been created, he thinks, since everything that was created is good. Evil, he thinks, is the antithesis of the good creation. When we turn away from the reality that is good and turn toward the “not good,” we have turned toward the evil that Augustine identifies with the absence of good; the absence of God; the antithesis of the overflowingly beautiful, gracious world of resources and possibilities that God proffers to us as a gift.</p>
<p class="indent">To turn away from the goodness of creation—to ignore our own created goodness—is to lose sight of who God is and who we are. It is to lose track of the fact that we live in immediate relationship to God. It is to feel and to live as those defined by a falsity, forgetting the reality that God makes us and meets us.</p>
<p class="indent">Liberation theologians have raised concerns about the Augustinian definition, pointing to incidences in history when understanding evil as “absence” has led to minimizing heinous, inhuman behaviors. Some of the questions they ask are: Is it adequate to describe Hitler’s murder of <a id="page_166" class="calibre7"></a>ten million people as a turning away from his created goodness? If we understand evil as the absence of good, what is it, exactly, that we can say to those whose lives were devastated, for example, by the slave trade in the United States? If I understand the harm I have done someone to be inconsistent with who I am, won’t I run the risk of minimizing my own sin, even as I confess and apologize?</p>
<p class="indent">James Cone is among those who suggest that, while Augustine offers a rational understanding of evil that helps us make sense of evil’s origin in light of what we believe about the nature of God and creation, it fails in at least two ways. First, it does not adequately address the anguish of the sufferer. A mother whose son has been lynched experiences evil not merely as the absence of good, but also as something substantive and real. Second, it does not attend to the political structures that make for human suffering and that must be addressed and transformed, prophetically and with legislative changes that promote justice.<a id="rch5en56" class="calibre7"></a><sup class="calibre12"><a href="notes.xhtml#ch5en56" class="calibre5">56</a></sup> Cone suggests, and I agree, that we be careful not only to have Augustine’s definition in hand when thinking about evil, but that we attend also to the many biblical stories that tell of ways oppressed people of faith were empowered by God to confront destructive principalities and powers.</p>
<p class="indent">In my view, laying claim to the truth of creation’s goodness and understanding evil as the antithesis of all that God intends and desires readily funds our resistance to oppression with one proviso: that we do not convolute <em class="calibre8">evil</em> with <em class="calibre8">sin</em>. This is critically important. If we understand evil to be “the absence of good” as that it is <em class="calibre8">without substance</em>, we must emphasize that sin is something very different. Sin is not identical to evil. Rather, it is the <em class="calibre8">distortion</em> of the good that is quite definitely substantive. When I sin, I in my substantive goodness have turned away from what I am, and the good world God has made, and turned toward what I, and my world, am not. When I sin, I am not evil, but I have turned toward evil—toward the nothingness that is not God.</p>
<p class="indent">With this understanding of sin in play, it is clear that when we confess our sins and ask for forgiveness, we are confessing behaviors that are substantive and that need to be renounced and corrected. It is also clear, when we witness institutions and systems that are corrupt and oppressive, that <a id="page_167" class="calibre7"></a>these have turned away from God and God’s good creation and have acted in concrete, twisted ways that not only reflect a distorted understanding of the reality God has given us, but also contribute to the distortions. In other words, it is not only the case that sinful institutions are lured, by the demonic, into turning away from God’s creative intentions. It is also that they, themselves, become distorted and demonic, drawing sinful human beings into their wake and forgetting, altogether, what it should mean for our actual existence that we have been met and made by God.<a id="rch5en57" class="calibre7"></a><sup class="calibre12"><a href="notes.xhtml#ch5en57" class="calibre5">57</a></sup></p>
<p class="indent">In the next chapter we will pick up on this understanding of sin and then move to considering how God redeems us from it, both personally and corporately. I will show how our salvation restores us to living in tune with who we really are, as the God who meets us has made us and is making us to be.</p>
</body>
</html>
