<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>Holding Faith</title>
    <meta content="urn:uuid:e0000000-0000-0000-0000-000004415877" name="Adept.expected.resource"/>
    <meta http-equiv="Content-Type" content="text/html; charset=utf-8"/>
  <link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="../../stylesheet.css"/>
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="../../page_styles.css"/>
</head>
  <body class="calibre">
<h2 class="h1"><a id="page_258" class="calibre5"></a><a id="page_259" class="calibre5"></a><a id="ch9" class="calibre5"></a>Chapter Nine</h2>
<h2 class="h2a">W<small class="calibre11">HERE</small> A<small class="calibre11">RE</small> W<small class="calibre11">E</small> H<small class="calibre11">EADED</small>?</h2>
<h3 class="h3x"><a id="ch9lev1" class="calibre5"></a><em class="calibre13">The Doctrine of Christian Hope</em></h3>
<p class="noindent">As members of the church visible and invisible (ch. 7) who at times struggle to accept the blessing of God’s grace (ch. 8), Christians have a definite focus. It is not on our own agenda, but on God’s promises. Specifically, it is on God’s promise to complete “the good work” God has begun in all of God’s children,<a id="rch9en1" class="calibre7"></a><sup class="calibre12"><a href="notes.xhtml#ch9en1" class="calibre5">1</a></sup> to accomplish the redemption for which all creation waits with eagerness.<a id="rch9en2" class="calibre7"></a><sup class="calibre12"><a href="notes.xhtml#ch9en2" class="calibre5">2</a></sup> In this final part of the book we consider what Christian hope looks like and how Christians participate in it as those whom God sends out into the world to share the good news. Following the patterning of the Lord’s Prayer we consider, in this chapter, the character of God’s promised Kingdom. “Thy Kingdom Come!” Christians pray, imagining a new earth in which all are given daily bread, extended forgiveness, empowered to forgive, and delivered from evil. In <a href="chapter10.xhtml" class="calibre7">chapter 10</a>, the final chapter, we focus on another imperative issued in the prayer. “Thy will be done,” Christians pray. But what is it that we are called and sent by God to <em class="calibre8">do</em>, exactly? And how do we get busy living into the promised Kingdom, even today, in a way that helps bring its eternal reality into our day-to-day living in this world?</p>
<h3 class="h2"><a id="page_260" class="calibre5"></a>W<small class="calibre3">HO</small> I<small class="calibre3">S</small> H<small class="calibre3">OPE</small> F<small class="calibre3">OR</small>?</h3>
<p class="indent">We ended the last chapter (<a href="chapter08.xhtml#ch8" class="calibre7">ch. 8</a>) imagining that we are swimming in grace, cognizant of our identity as God’s beloved children and loving and serving one another not as a matter of obligation, but freely. This essential meditation on Christian life, in exploring the dynamics of how we come to live in conscious recognition of our belovedness to God, is itself more individualistically than communally focused. It is meant to be read in tandem with the chapter on church that preceded it (<a href="chapter07.xhtml#ch7" class="calibre7">ch. 7</a>), where the church is the place and people with, among, and from whom we experience the blessings of God. God blesses us as individuals, but always as individuals in relation to others: individuals who find their home in particular communities with particular convictions and practices.</p>
<p class="indent">Christian hope is, similarly, not only for individuals, though it is experienced, in one way or another,<a id="rch9en3" class="calibre7"></a><sup class="calibre12"><a href="notes.xhtml#ch9en3" class="calibre5">3</a></sup> in the lives of every disciple. Christian hope is the hope of the whole church, and even beyond: it is the hope of the entire world. As the church is a “parable and promise of the kingdom of God”<a id="rch9en4" class="calibre7"></a><sup class="calibre12"><a href="notes.xhtml#ch9en4" class="calibre5">4</a></sup> so the hope Christians hold is not their own personal possession, but the property of all. To the degree Christians can glimpse the Kingdom breaking through and into this world they are called to point it out to others. Insofar as they are ever open to perceiving God wherever God might be self-revealed they are also called to respond when others do the pointing, when those from other communities or other faith traditions claim to have caught a glimpse. Preachers watch for and bear witness to where they see the Spirit present and at work in the <em class="calibre8">ekklesia</em> and the <em class="calibre8">koinonia</em>, that the people of God might be encouraged. Mentors listen and testify to the ways in which God has worked even in and through the difficulties of their lives, making a way where there was no way.<a id="rch9en5" class="calibre7"></a><sup class="calibre12"><a href="notes.xhtml#ch9en5" class="calibre5">5</a></sup> Parents learn and then tell their children stories about how God has acted in history to save and to claim unlikely individuals, families, communities, and nations.</p>
<p class="indent">Many Christians have hope that God is with us that is based not only in their conviction that God broke into history in the burning bush and at Bethlehem, but that God breaks into our time, our lives, our world, again and again. <em class="calibre8">Chronos</em> (created, chronological time) gives way to <em class="calibre8">kairos</em> (eternity <a id="page_261" class="calibre7"></a>breaking into chronological time). People of faith have tasted this in their lives, and it only makes them yearn for more. And so they pray, again, that God’s will be done on earth as in heaven. And they go to church, again, hoping that something will happen to remind them that <em class="calibre8">kairos</em> will one day undo the mortality and sin connected to <em class="calibre8">chronos</em>, and every tear will be wiped away.</p>
<p class="indent">As many instances of hope that can be found, another common experience in this world, and among people of faith, is hopelessness. Hopelessness is, unfortunately, often quite understandable, given the tragedies in our lives and the life of the world. I write these words on the day after yet another school shooting in the US. It is a difficult day to write about hope. The last thing we need to be doing on days like today (which are certainly too numerous) is trying to overwhelm grief and frustration with upbeat, religiousy-sounding aphorisms that, however well-intentioned, seem geared, primarily, to managing everyone’s despair so the economies of our lives together don’t suddenly come to a screeching halt. This, in contrast to what might really help: meeting people with the strength of God’s promises in ways that empower them to stomp their feet and pray once again—<em class="calibre8">Thy Kingdom come, already!</em>—recommiting to doing the will of God that will help bring the Kingdom to fruition.</p>
<p class="indent">It is this more authentic, tenacious, stay-in-the-game version of hope we could use more of, in this world. This is the kind of hope Christians claim to have in Christ, by the power of the Spirit. But sometimes it is harder to hold, show, and share than we want it to be, so distressed are we by the suffering of the world. If there is truth to the stereotype that people of faith are more liable to “shout” rather than to “laugh,”<a id="rch9en6" class="calibre7"></a><sup class="calibre12"><a href="notes.xhtml#ch9en6" class="calibre5">6</a></sup> it might be because shouting is the more appropriate response people of faith and hope should have to events like school shootings. To hope, when our hope is founded in the promises of God, looks sometimes like shouts of “No!” against injustices we can see are <em class="calibre8">not</em> what God desires. To hope, when our hope follows our commitment to “whatever is honorable . . . just . . . pure . . . pleasing . . . commendable . . . excellent . . . and worthy of praise,”<a id="rch9en7" class="calibre7"></a><sup class="calibre12"><a href="notes.xhtml#ch9en7" class="calibre5">7</a></sup> is to be disappointed a lot of the time. What we are sent by God to do in the world, in the face of all that is painful and <a id="page_262" class="calibre7"></a>disconcerting, is not to cheer everyone up, as though we are in some way the world’s court jesters. It is, rather, to share God’s promises, which hold nevertheless, even when it appears they are nowhere in evidence.</p>
<p class="indent">People of faith, then, are not sent by God to be the world’s cheerleaders. And yet to walk around morosely, as though the fate of the world is solely up to us, and we are failing in our task, is also problematic. Barth once asked, in a sermon he preached one Ascension Day (1956),</p>
<p class="blockquotet">Why don’t our faces shine? . . . Why are the faces we show each other at best superior looking, serious, questioning, sorrowful and reproachful faces, at worst even grimaces or lifeless masks, real Carnival masks? We are in the world not to comfort ourselves, but to comfort others . . . yet the one and only genuine comfort we may offer to our fellow human beings is this reflection of heaven, of Jesus Christ, of God himself, as it appears on a radiant face. Why don’t we do it?<a id="rch9en8" class="calibre7"></a><sup class="calibre12"><a href="notes.xhtml#ch9en8" class="calibre5">8</a></sup></p>
<p class="noindentt">Barth is hard on people of faith, here, reminding us that the work of comforting others is not really about ourselves. What we are sent out to share are not our honest opinions, our authentic feelings, our life experiences, or our best practices—as important as all of these things are. We are sent to share Christ, who is God with us no matter what.</p>
<p class="indent">Isaiah suggests that, when we comfort others by testifying to God’s presence, we help them navigate their despair over difficult circumstances. “How lovely on the mountains are the feet of those who brings good news, who announce peace and bring good news of happiness, who announce salvation, and say to Zion, ‘Your God reigns!’”<a id="rch9en9" class="calibre7"></a><sup class="calibre12"><a href="notes.xhtml#ch9en9" class="calibre5">9</a></sup> Peace, happiness, and salvation: these promises of God are so much more concrete and actionable than wishful thinking or vaguely asserting that, somehow, things are all going to work out if only we trust in God, work harder, or both. Jeremiah insists, along the same lines, that the hope we share has distinctive shape and perimeters: “I know the plans I have in mind for you, declares the Lord;” Jeremiah writes, “they are plans for peace, not disaster, to give you a future filled with hope.”<a id="rch9en10" class="calibre7"></a><sup class="calibre12"><a href="notes.xhtml#ch9en10" class="calibre5">10</a></sup></p>
<h3 class="h2"><a id="page_263" class="calibre5"></a>C<small class="calibre3">HRISTIAN</small> H<small class="calibre3">OPE IN THE</small> P<small class="calibre3">RESENT</small></h3>
<p class="indent">Traditionally, the final doctrine considered in any Christian theological system is <em class="calibre8">eschatology</em>. “Eschatology” means, literally, “words about the end.” And some approaches to eschatology have, consistent with this, focused more on what people of faith have thought of as end-of-time issues than on what eschatology means for the flourishing of human life in the here and now. A very popular manifestation of a kind of end-of-time oriented eschatology is the international, bestselling Left Behind book series, authored by Tim LaHaye and Jerry Jenkins.<a id="rch9en11" class="calibre7"></a><sup class="calibre12"><a href="notes.xhtml#ch9en11" class="calibre5">11</a></sup> The focus of these books is not as much on God’s promises in the present as on what God will do in the future and how we can get ready. If we do not do what it takes to get ready for the rapture, the Second Coming, the tribulation, and the millennium, the books convey, we will be “left behind”—excluded from God’s Kingdom. In direct contrast to this, the idea of eschatology presented here, focusing on Christian hope for this world, is premised in God’s outlandish promise to be with us no matter what. Even when appearances seem to argue to the contrary, we have <em class="calibre8">not</em> been left behind. This world is not a testing ground for the real world to come, but the place in which God promises ever to be with us.<a id="rch9en12" class="calibre7"></a><sup class="calibre12"><a href="notes.xhtml#ch9en12" class="calibre5">12</a></sup> Following this, to be people of hope is to cling to the promise we have <em class="calibre8">not</em> been abandoned, regardless of our circumstances.</p>
<p class="indent">Theologians are generally determined that eschatologies be shaped in ways that address important matters related to our existence in the here and now. And most theologians, believing there is or at least should be a connection between this world and the next, make some attempt to work at the interface of the “now” and the “not yet.” The conversation in this chapter assumes, therefore, that an eschatology that cannot speak hope to the present is no real hope at all. It is, rather, an <em class="calibre8">escape</em>—an escape from the struggles of the present world that God so loves, that God is with, and that God refuses to abandon. Any notions of “hope” that are grounded solely or primarily in the future actually rob us of the hope against hope that lies at the heart of our faith—the hope that leads us to live abundantly in the here and now, the hope that makes it possible for us to participate in and contribute to this world in freedom, the hope that empowers us to <a id="page_264" class="calibre7"></a>hold faith <em class="calibre8">despite</em> the ambiguities that surround us, the hope that promises inclusion for all God’s beloved creatures.</p>
<p class="indent">So important is the idea that eschatology must have something to do with our real struggles that, when I lecture on this doctrine in the classroom or in the church, I hand out index cards before starting and ask participants to write “What do I fear?” on one side of the card, and “What do I hope for?” on the other side. Then I ask them to write their responses. Often, I collect the cards and read everyone’s fears, and then everyone’s hopes (anonymously, of course). I always say, before I start the lecture that follows, that however we think of the doctrine of eschatology, it better have something to do with our real-life fears and hopes.</p>
<p class="indent">I can’t resist giving you an example of one of the “ah-has” that often occurs when I do this exercise: two of the most common “fears” that different people commonly write on the card are “afraid to die” and “afraid to be kept indefinitely alive.” Resurrection speaks to both of these fears. To those who are afraid to die the doctrine of eschatology brings the promise of resurrection. This world is not the end. The end of earthly life does not mean the end of all life. Christ rose, and we will rise again with him.</p>
<p class="indent">But the doctrine of eschatology also has something to offer to those who are afraid they will be kept alive indefinitely. These people fear being kept on life support until the inheritance they have worked hard to save for their children is completely used up. They fear endless suffering. They fear being remembered for who they are in their final weeks, lying in a vegetative state. Resurrection speaks to this fear by saying that indeed it is OK to prepare DNR (do not resuscitate) orders for your loved ones to use when the time comes for you to die. To believe in the resurrection means that there is no reason to cling to life in this world as if that is all there is, as precious as life in this world can be. We can let go of life when it is time because resurrection promises that life continues.</p>
<p class="indent">To hold faith is to be people of hope. And to have hope is not to engage in wishful thinking, but to desire and enact what it is that God desires and does in the context of our very real fears and hopes. How do we begin to imagine what Christian hope is supposed to look like, so that we can live into it and, even, contribute to its coming?</p>
<div class="box">
<p class="boxhead"><a id="page_265" class="calibre7"></a>CHRISTIAN DOCTRINES: INFUSED WITH HOPE</p>
<table class="calibre18">
<tr class="calibre19">
<td class="calibre20"><p class="noindent"><strong class="calibre9">Revelation:</strong></p></td>
<td class="calibre21"><p class="noindent">We know the unknowable God.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="calibre19">
<td class="calibre22"><p class="tablet"><strong class="calibre9">Incarnation:</strong></p></td>
<td class="calibre22"><p class="tablet">God is with us and for us in Jesus Christ.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="calibre19">
<td class="calibre22"><p class="tablet"><strong class="calibre9">Trinity:</strong></p></td>
<td class="calibre22"><p class="tablet">God’s love for us is true to God who is love.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="calibre19">
<td class="calibre22"><p class="tablet"><strong class="calibre9">Creation:</strong></p></td>
<td class="calibre22"><p class="tablet">The gifts of life are good and to be enjoyed.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="calibre19">
<td class="calibre22"><p class="tablet"><strong class="calibre9">Providence:</strong></p></td>
<td class="calibre22"><p class="tablet">Creation is ongoing; God enlivens every creature in every place at every moment.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="calibre19">
<td class="calibre22"><p class="tablet"><strong class="calibre9">Humanity:</strong></p></td>
<td class="calibre22"><p class="tablet">We are created in the image of God.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="calibre19">
<td class="calibre22"><p class="tablet"><strong class="calibre9">Sin:</strong></p></td>
<td class="calibre22"><p class="tablet">Sin is an aberration; finitude is not a sin.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="calibre19">
<td class="calibre22"><p class="tablet"><strong class="calibre9">Salvation:</strong></p></td>
<td class="calibre22"><p class="tablet">We are forgiven; we can live in cognizance of grace.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="calibre19">
<td class="calibre22"><p class="tablet"><strong class="calibre9">Holy Spirit:</strong></p></td>
<td class="calibre22"><p class="tablet">God intercedes for us, empowers us, and gifts us with faith.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="calibre19">
<td class="calibre22"><p class="tablet"><strong class="calibre9">Church:</strong></p></td>
<td class="calibre22"><p class="tablet">We imagine God’s Kingdom and claim it for the world.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="calibre19">
<td class="calibre22"><p class="tablet"><strong class="calibre9">Sacraments:</strong></p></td>
<td class="calibre22"><p class="tablet">God blesses us through ordinary means.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="calibre19">
<td class="calibre22"><p class="tablet"><strong class="calibre9">Resurrection:</strong></p></td>
<td class="calibre22"><p class="tablet">Death does not have the final word.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="calibre19">
<td class="calibre22"><p class="tablet"><strong class="calibre9">Ascension:</strong></p></td>
<td class="calibre22"><p class="tablet">We participate in God’s life and work.</p></td>
</tr>
</table>
</div>
<h3 class="h2">H<small class="calibre3">OPE AND THE</small> C<small class="calibre3">ROSS</small></h3>
<p class="indent">Traditionally, Christian hope is identified with the resurrection, ascension, and Second Coming of Jesus Christ. As we discussed in the chapters on incarnation and salvation, the one who entered into life with us when he was born to Mary in Bethlehem and held nothing back from us when <a id="page_266" class="calibre7"></a>he died on the cross at Golgotha drew us into the very life of the triune God by rising from the dead and ascending into heaven. The resurrection and the ascension signify a triumph over death, oppression, sin, and suffering in this world. Paul writes, reflecting on this victory, that all death will lose its “sting” when our “perishable bodies put on imperishability” even as Jesus Christ’s body put on immortality in the resurrection.<a id="rch9en13" class="calibre7"></a><sup class="calibre12"><a href="notes.xhtml#ch9en13" class="calibre5">13</a></sup> Jesus himself tried to comfort his disciples with reassurances that he would “come again” and “take them to himself” so that they would never again be apart. And he wanted the disciples to know, even before this “coming again,” that he had them in mind. He was “preparing a place for them,” he told them, planning for reunion.<a id="rch9en14" class="calibre7"></a><sup class="calibre12"><a href="notes.xhtml#ch9en14" class="calibre5">14</a></sup></p>
<p class="indent">Especially since the rise of science in modernity, we have wondered how to think about bodily resurrection. There are still today many Christians who point to Paul’s words in 1 Corinthians 15:17 and say it is necessary to hold to a literal reading of the resurrection of the body, else “our faith is in vain” and we are without hope that sin and suffering will be overcome.</p>
<p class="indent">But the idea of the resurrection of the body can also be crucial to people of faith who are reticent about relying on a purely literal understanding.<a id="rch9en15" class="calibre7"></a><sup class="calibre12"><a href="notes.xhtml#ch9en15" class="calibre5">15</a></sup> To say that Jesus rose bodily from the dead is to insist, as I have mentioned, that the incarnation is not a thirty-three-year experiment. Whatever it means to say that Jesus Christ is “God with us” in the flesh, it does not end on Easter morning. To confess the bodily resurrection, ascension, and Second Coming (as Christians do every time we say the Apostles’ Creed) is to remember that Jesus didn’t leave bodies behind when he rose. On the contrary, he took these bodies, this world, our lives along with him into the life of God: into the promised kin-dom for which all creation groans and hopes.<a id="rch9en16" class="calibre7"></a><sup class="calibre12"><a href="notes.xhtml#ch9en16" class="calibre5">16</a></sup> The hope we have that is oriented around bodily resurrection is the hope that astonished us when the “Word became flesh,”<a id="rch9en17" class="calibre7"></a><sup class="calibre12"><a href="notes.xhtml#ch9en17" class="calibre5">17</a></sup> the hope that grew when Jesus announced his ministry would concern itself with freeing <em class="calibre8">bodies</em> from captivity,<a id="rch9en18" class="calibre7"></a><sup class="calibre12"><a href="notes.xhtml#ch9en18" class="calibre5">18</a></sup> the hope that, whatever Christian hope is about, it does not ask us to set aside concerns about hunger, abuse, violence, lack of medical care, or enslavement as incidental in the face of what is to come. On the contrary, to confess bodily <a id="page_267" class="calibre7"></a>resurrection is to insist, as Jesus did throughout his ministry, that bodies and souls are inextricable, and that bodies always matter.</p>
<p class="indent">The problem comes when we associate Christian hope with the resurrection but not with the cross, even though it seems fairly natural to do so. After all, human beings regardless of their circumstances or degree of suffering are eager to be free of all pain and the struggles of this mortal life. “It may be Friday, but Sunday’s coming!”<a id="rch9en19" class="calibre7"></a><sup class="calibre12"><a href="notes.xhtml#ch9en19" class="calibre5">19</a></sup> writes Tony Campolo, trying to offer a word of encouragement to those who feel stuck in the suffering of Friday night.</p>
<p class="indent">The reality is, though, that the exhortation to “just hang on” for a couple of days is not all that useful on Friday night, when Sunday-morning resurrection cannot yet be seen. Even if it was seen in some way by Jesus himself, for that matter, the promise of resurrection did not seem to alleviate pain, but exacerbated it. Knowing what the Kingdom of God looks like can deepen our experience of the sufferings of this world, so dissonant are they with what has been promised. Images of those suffering in Dante’s <em class="calibre8">Purgatorio</em> come to mind; I have always imaged that the sight of Paradise in the distance deepens their agony.<a id="rch9en20" class="calibre7"></a><sup class="calibre12"><a href="notes.xhtml#ch9en20" class="calibre5">20</a></sup> Araceley de Roccietti describes Christians fighting for justice in Latin America as living “between profound wretchedness and astounding hope,” suggesting that the vision for a world marked by equality, safety, and shared resources for all people makes it impossible to ignore any “violation of rights.”<a id="rch9en21" class="calibre7"></a><sup class="calibre12"><a href="notes.xhtml#ch9en21" class="calibre5">21</a></sup></p>
<p class="indent">Concerned that we extend hope to those who are in the midst of suffering, theologians insist that we understand the cross, as well as the resurrection, ascension, and Second Coming, as a symbol of hope. Contemporary theologian Jürgen Moltmann has made this a major emphasis of his life’s work. In <em class="calibre8">The Crucified God</em>, for example, he explores how the cross offers hope because it shows us not only that God suffers with us, but that suffering is included in the very life of the triune God in and through the ascended, crucified one, Jesus Christ.<a id="rch9en22" class="calibre7"></a><sup class="calibre12"><a href="notes.xhtml#ch9en22" class="calibre5">22</a></sup> Suffering is not only something God did for us two thousand years ago; the suffering of the world <em class="calibre8">today</em> is somehow, by way of that cross, taken up into God’s life and plan. This idea is incredibly reassuring, Moltmann holds, on the Friday night before <a id="page_268" class="calibre7"></a>resurrection. It reminds us that God is present to us, and we are present to God, even before suffering is no more.</p>
<p class="indent">Having included the cross as a symbol of hope, we now turn to exploring the resurrection, ascension, and Second Coming of Christ. How do these hard-to-understand and sometimes hard-to-believe eschatological doctrines shape and empower Christian service in the lives of people who hold faith?</p>
<h3 class="h2">T<small class="calibre3">HE</small> R<small class="calibre3">ESURRECTION AND THE</small> A<small class="calibre3">SCENSION</small></h3>
<p class="indent">Theologically, resurrection and ascension are inextricably intertwined. If the bodily resurrection of Christ reinforces the fact that the Word made flesh at Christmastime remains incarnate in Jesus Christ even when he rises, the ascension of Christ emphasizes, again, that the incarnation is not just something Jesus Christ does, but who he actually is—for all of eternity. The creed, in fact, insists that Jesus is “sitting at the right hand of God the Father Almighty” even now! It’s almost as though Christian doctrines somehow know they cannot remind us often enough that the God who is with us in our very flesh is determined to take creaturely existence along wherever this God is going.</p>
<p class="indent">Resurrection and ascension might be inseparable, but it can seem even harder to talk about the “so what?” of the ascension than it is to talk about the relevance of the resurrection. With resurrection we kind of get it, even with the difficult problem of a person coming back to life. It is about death being overcome. It is about the forces of good winning out over the powers of darkness. It is the stuff great movies are made of.</p>
<p class="indent">The story of Jesus floating up into the clouds,<a id="rch9en23" class="calibre7"></a><sup class="calibre12"><a href="notes.xhtml#ch9en23" class="calibre5">23</a></sup> however, is a tough sell. It’s one of those stories Christians have tended, even, to be a little embarrassed about. “You Christians believe all sorts of crazy things, don’t you?” someone sitting next to me on a plane once said, when I made the mistake of pulling my Bible out of my bag. “Is it true you think Jesus <a id="page_269" class="calibre7"></a>started out in heaven, then came down to earth, and then sort of just ‘floated up’ again?”</p>
<p class="indent">How do we find our way “in” to the strange story of the ascension? What are we supposed to do with it? This one who was born, and ministered, and died and rose is “lifted up in a cloud” and “taken out of the sight” of the disciples. And this time there is no appearance of heavenly hosts, singing “Gloria” to help us out with what’s going on. There is no weeping or crying out to guide us in how to respond. There is no wine made out of water or baskets of overflowing food, to drink and eat as we marvel at Jesus’s miraculous powers. There is no stone rolled away to speculate about: Did someone steal the body, or did he <em class="calibre8">really</em> walk out? In the event of the ascension there are absolutely no distractions; there are no helpful hints, there is not much we can do but <em class="calibre8">look up</em> and wonder. And so we stand there, staring up with the disciples, as Jesus simply floats away. And we wonder (how could we help but wonder?): What does this mean? And: What do we do now? Or even: What will I ever tell the guy next to me on the plane about <em class="calibre8">this</em>? And to add insult to injury, by the way, two men in white robes walk up and start chiding us. <em class="calibre8">Whattya doing, staring up at the sky?</em> they say (more or less). <em class="calibre8">Don’t you know Jesus will come back the same way you saw him leave?</em></p>
<p class="indent"><em class="calibre8">Oh, yeah—well, now that information really helps. Thanks so much</em>.</p>
<p class="indent">OK . . . so: it seems things are a little trickier, all of a sudden, than they were around Christmastime, and especially since Easter morning, when we thought we had everything sorted out. The One Who Is With Us and The One Who Is Risen is suddenly and in mid-sentence leaving the world, and the Holy Spirit isn’t due to arrive for over a week. We’re about to find ourselves in a kind of a dead space, again. We felt it before, in the days between the cross and the resurrection. If Jesus is gone, and the Holy Spirit has not yet arrived, how are we supposed to connect with God?</p>
<p class="indent">As panicked as we might feel, when we put ourselves in the place of the disciples on Ascension Day, at least Jesus doesn’t leave, this time around, with a cry of despair. Instead, he exits in glory, making two promises as he goes: first, that the disciples will be baptized by the Holy Spirit soon, and second, that he will return—well, <em class="calibre8">sometime</em>.</p>
<p class="indent"><a id="page_270" class="calibre7"></a>Jesus’s departure reminds me, in some ways, of what it looked like when I left my children, when they were too little to read a calendar, to go on a trip. I may have ascended by taking a plane, but was certainly flying all over the place—you know: packing my suitcase, and organizing the stuff my kids would need for school while I was gone, and printing my boarding pass, and stocking up the refrigerator. And all the while I was reassuring my children who seemed—just when I needed to be flying around!—to be always at my heels: “Don’t worry,” I’d say, “Daddy is going to be with you. You’re going to be OK.” And “Mommy’s coming back in just a few days.” I made the same two promises, really, that Jesus makes to us: (1) that there will be another nurturing presence when I am away, and (2) that my absence will only be temporary.</p>
<p class="indent">I have a gripe with Jesus, as a child waiting for him to come home: Jesus has been gone for too long. How in the world could he leave us with <em class="calibre8">no idea</em> of when he was coming back? When <em class="calibre8">I</em> went on trips when my kids were small, I told them over and over again how many nights I’d be away so they’d know exactly what to expect. You know what I did, to help them understand the timetable? I went to the Container Store and bought a bunch of little boxes, the size that are meant to hold toothpicks. They’re made of lucite, and they come in all different colors. What I did was put Hershey’s Kisses in the boxes—one per person, for every person who was at home—for the number of nights I was away. Three kisses for each night: one for my spouse Bill, one for our son Xander, and one for our daughter, Jessica. And then I’d put one extra box, with four kisses, that we would share together the night of my return. We put all the boxes up on the mantel, so the kids could see how many nights more before I would be back.</p>
<p class="indent">Now, don’t you think I did a better job than Jesus, in this? Of course, he did leave us something to chew, and something to swallow—something to remind us of our connection to his very body.</p>
<p class="indent">And this is what we want, isn’t it? We want to be connected, in some way, to his very body. We want to stay joined to the body of the one who joined himself to us by being born of Mary’s body, and dying as a body broken, and rising—embodied—to break bread with us again. “I am bone <a id="page_271" class="calibre7"></a>of your bone and flesh of your flesh,” Jesus tells us, by his actions, time and time again. And so we believe we are somehow connected to this body being lifted up, this body floating off—and into—the clouds. But how? How are we still connected?</p>
<p class="indent">How are we connected to bodies that are absent from us? What does it mean to be members of the “communion of saints”—those who in this world had bodies, and who Christians believe are, somehow, bodily resurrected from the dead?</p>
<p class="indent">These questions are impossible to answer, but fruitful to ask. They draw us to a truth greater than any explanation. The truth is this: we are joined to certain bodies even when we are separated from them, even when we haven’t seen them or touched them in a very long time. Our deepest intuitions testify to this. A grown man, dying on the battlefield, cries out for the tender touch of his mother. Two lovers, briefly separated, anticipate their next opportunity to embrace. A three-year-old girl, in her day care center, lies down for nap time with a photo in her grip: she looks at a picture of her father and her mother, her big brother and her cats, her grammy and her granddad. A nursing mother, her body begging for reconnection, wills her infant child to awake. A father watches out the window for his teenage son still not home, overwrought by his distinct, but irrational, sense that his very heart is out there—somewhere—walking around in the body of another. A widow helps her grandchildren create an avatar of their dead grandfather, so they can play games with him on their Wii. Yes, indeed—we’re still connected, all right. Connected to the bone.</p>
<h3 class="h2">T<small class="calibre3">HE</small> A<small class="calibre3">SCENSION AND</small> C<small class="calibre3">HRISTIAN</small> H<small class="calibre3">OPE</small></h3>
<p class="indent">As difficult as it is to watch Jesus ascend, the most painful experiences of life, it seems to me, are not about negotiating the distance between our bodies and the bodies of those we love. This can be done, and we constantly find new ways. We phone and we e-mail; we Skype and Facetime and iChat; we visit and we remember. Our grief at being separated is <a id="page_272" class="calibre7"></a>somehow bittersweet. Our most painful experiences come when the bodies we love resist us—when they leave us looking up with no promise of return. And this brokenness, this pain, is all around us. It is not the only story that defines us, but it is a major one. It’s a common story in this country, it’s a story of this world; it’s the story of the sin that moved Adam from his glorious exclamation to Eve that she is, indeed, “bone of my bone and flesh of my flesh” to his disparaging remark that <em class="calibre8">she made me do it! It’s her fault!</em><a id="rch9en24" class="calibre7"></a><sup class="calibre12"><a href="notes.xhtml#ch9en24" class="calibre5">24</a></sup> The brokenness of the world is seen in Adam withdrawing his body from Eve’s by ceasing to uphold her, holy and without blemish.<a id="rch9en25" class="calibre7"></a><sup class="calibre12"><a href="notes.xhtml#ch9en25" class="calibre5">25</a></sup> Adam abandons, and the two are separated. From each other, and from the earth. From the earth, and from God. And we’ve been trying to get back, ever since, to the physical unity we once knew, as creatures in God’s good creation.</p>
<p class="indent">Jesus doesn’t want us to think he is abandoning us. The last thing he is about, of course, is contributing to our brokenness. Jesus is, after all, in the business of healing. And so he is a little worried, near the end of his life, about how we might interpret all his comings and goings. He wants us to know that he yearns to be connected to us the way a parent wants to be connected to a child. “Do not let your hearts be troubled,” he assures the disciples, in John 14. “If I go and prepare a place for you, I will come again and will take you to myself, that where I am you may be also.”<a id="rch9en26" class="calibre7"></a><sup class="calibre12"><a href="notes.xhtml#ch9en26" class="calibre5">26</a></sup> And in John 17, right at the end of his life on earth, he seems to be down on his knees <em class="calibre8">begging</em> the Father to help us understand just how near he is to us, and how near we are—therefore—both to God and to one another. “As you . . . are in me and I am in you,” he prays, “may they also be in us.” “The glory that you have given me I have given them, so that they may be one, as we are one,” he insists. And finally: “Father, I desire that those also, whom you have given me, may be with me where I am.”<a id="rch9en27" class="calibre7"></a><sup class="calibre12"><a href="notes.xhtml#ch9en27" class="calibre5">27</a></sup></p>
<p class="indent">While what Jesus is saying in John 17 might be difficult to diagram, at least one thing is clear: Jesus wants us to be with him where he is, and not just in the future, but <em class="calibre8">right now</em>. And so this is what he requests from the Father. Now, in one sense, this might seem a funny thing for Jesus to ask for, just as he is heading out for the clouds. He is <em class="calibre8">leaving</em> the earth we <a id="page_273" class="calibre7"></a>live on, so how can we be with him? But in another way what Jesus says isn’t all that surprising, given who he is. For Jesus is the one who entered deeply into existence with us; the one who held nothing back in offering his very body. And now the one who entered in with us wants to lift us up out of the brokenness and into life with him. The one who sacrificed himself wants to make us living sacrifices, reflecting his own <em class="calibre8">kenosis</em> (self-emptying). He reaches in, in the incarnation and the cross. He lifts us up, in the resurrection and the ascension. At all points, he manifests a love that will not let us go: a love that glorifies us by exalting us, righteous and holy and beloved.</p>
<p class="indent">These are the kinds of things we think about in relation to the ascension. That God has raised us up, with Christ, to be united with God and with one another. That God exalts us to a life that insists separation, and brokenness, and abandonment are not the end of the story. That though we are tired of waiting for Jesus to come back, we will still keep watching and waiting (this week I myself want him to clean up the school shootings, violence in the Middle East, climate change, racial violence, and sexual harassment). The doctrine of the ascension reminds us to think about living lives that refuse to give up on the hope that bodies are related to one another and that the world, therefore, can be transformed.</p>
<p class="indent">We might not understand the story of Jesus’s ascension, but we know what it is about. It is about being connected to the bone. It is about being connected not only because Jesus enters into all aspects of our lives and circumstances with us, but because he also lifts us up, with him, into full participation in the very life of God. And from up there, with Jesus, in the ascension, we have a really nice view: we can see the glory of God in all the dappled, shiny, colorful, or plain things in creation and in the faces of all who had once seemed pained. From up there, with Jesus, we can also know our own glory: the glory that comes with seeing ourselves as God sees us; the glory we experience when we know we are loved, the glory of those whose bodies are precious, the glory of those who—in life and in death—belong to God.</p>
<h3 class="h2"><a id="page_274" class="calibre5"></a>T<small class="calibre3">HE</small> R<small class="calibre3">AISING OF</small> C<small class="calibre3">HRIST AND THE</small> C<small class="calibre3">OMING OF THE</small> K<small class="calibre3">INGDOM</small></h3>
<p class="indent">The resurrection is a symbol of Christian hope not only because of what it promises to resolve, but also because of what it is determined to invite. It promises to resolve the problem of sin, suffering, and death, as Paul celebrates in 1 Corinthians 15. But it also invites us into a new way of being: to live more fully into the Kingdom of God that Jesus is always talking about; to wait in Jerusalem,<a id="rch9en28" class="calibre7"></a><sup class="calibre12"><a href="notes.xhtml#ch9en28" class="calibre5">28</a></sup> where the Holy Spirit will empower us to participate more fully in what God is up to in the world; to ourselves imagine, enact, and contribute to the coming of God’s Kingdom to earth as it is in heaven.</p>
<p class="indent">The resurrection, connected with the ascension and Second Coming, bespeaks a new reality—a reality into which we have entered, but which is not yet here. What does it look like for us to “watch and pray” for its coming? How do we begin, even, to imagine a “new heaven and a new earth” in such a way that we can live into it and, perhaps, even make a contribution to its realization?</p>
<h3 class="h2">H<small class="calibre3">OPE AND</small> I<small class="calibre3">MAGINATION</small></h3>
<p class="indent">Some things are just hard to imagine.</p>
<p class="indent">I have trouble imagining, for example, the existence of a Krispy Kreme donut that does not contain hydrogenated oil, even though our local Krispy Kreme advertises that such oil has been removed. I have trouble imagining that every room in our home could be tidy at the same time, even though my friends say there will come a phase in my life when our kids are in college, when we will have fewer responsibilities, and when comprehensive room tidiness will be easier to achieve.</p>
<p class="indent">Some things are just hard to imagine because we know something about what the world is like, and we know . . . well, we know how we are. I once had a student drop an 8:30 a.m. class she had with me—an elective <a id="page_275" class="calibre7"></a>class she really wanted to take—because she could not imagine waking up early enough in the morning to make it. She tried a couple of times, finally bringing me her add/drop slip. She told me, in a breaking voice: “Dr. Rigby, I just know myself too well. I’m not going to be able to do this.” As I signed the slip, I remember commenting to her that it really was a shame. She had signed up for the class, so there must have been a time when she would have imagined she could do it. Where had her imagination failed?</p>
<p class="indent">Many of us would say we know how she feels. Maybe not about how hard it is to get up early in the morning, but about any number of other perfectly ordinary yet seemingly insurmountable elements of daily life. We know enough about our own weaknesses and about the idiosyncrasies of those whom we love to assess what can reasonably be imagined, and what, really, we should not even bother imagining. Things simply are what they are, we might say, matter-of-factly. People don’t change, we might add. And these might be acceptable conclusions if we didn’t want things to be different. But when we do need and even want to make a change, and finally give up even imagining being able to make it because to do so is “just not possible for me” or “not the way things work,” is, to be honest, something of a shame.</p>
<p class="indent">Sometimes we resist imagining something different because we, on some level, don’t really want things to change. We might not like things the way things are, but at least we understand them. <em class="calibre8">I don’t even want to imagine my husband changing in relation to X, because that would mean I’d have to change in relation to Y</em>, we might say to ourselves. <em class="calibre8">And then I wouldn’t even have X to complain about!</em> Or maybe we think to ourselves, <em class="calibre8">I don’t want to even imagine my church becoming _____________, because that would mean I would have to ____________. And I know how I am, and I know I’m not going to ____________, even if I should</em>. A faithful church person once told me, for example, that her church had wanted to hire a particular young woman to be the congregation’s pastor, but the committee couldn’t get past their suspicion that she might soon want to take parental leave, noting that she was newly married. “We just didn’t <a id="page_276" class="calibre7"></a>want to get into all that,” the committee member confessed, demonstrating a terrible lack of imagination.</p>
<p class="indent">While we often resist imagining something different because we don’t really want things to change, I think it is even more often the case that we resist imagining because we are afraid. We are afraid to set our expectations high because we don’t want to be disappointed. We know ourselves well enough to be aware that, as Paul wrote, “we do not do the good we want, but the evil we do not want is what we do.”<a id="rch9en29" class="calibre7"></a><sup class="calibre12"><a href="notes.xhtml#ch9en29" class="calibre5">29</a></sup> Perhaps it is better to set our expectations low, and not to imagine too much, we tell ourselves. Then we won’t be disappointed.</p>
<p class="indent">Which leaves us in a bit of a pickle, when it comes to Christian life as we described it in the preceding chapter. This is because to be a Christian is to be constantly imagining something altogether different than how we are, and how this world is. Every time we pray the Lord’s Prayer, we ask for God’s Kingdom to come “on earth as it is in heaven.” This prayer that Jesus taught us invites us to imagine a world characterized <em class="calibre8">not</em> by hunger, conflict, and sin, but by daily bread, forgiveness, and deliverance from evil.</p>
<p class="indent">Scripture invites us to imagine a world—the New Jerusalem!—in which every tear is wiped away from every eye.<a id="rch9en30" class="calibre7"></a><sup class="calibre12"><a href="notes.xhtml#ch9en30" class="calibre5">30</a></sup> Where there is no more weeping. Where people do not die before their time, and everyone’s time is one hundred years or more. Where those who build houses get to live in them themselves, rather than handing them over to those who are richer, and going home from working on a mansion to themselves sleeping in a trailer park. Where those who plant and cultivate the pineapples can actually eat them, rather than handing them over to Dole or Del Monte. Where the children we birth are at no risk for calamity, but instead live into the fullness of life that we desire for them. Where stomachs will be full without violence; the wolf will eat with the lamb; the lion will eat straw rather than killing the ox. Where the One who is Alpha and Omega will dwell in our midst, quenching our thirst with the water of life.</p>
<p class="indent">If I cannot make it to an 8:30 class, how am I supposed to imagine such things? I know how I am, and I know how you are, and I know something about what this world is like, and—I’ll tell you—from what I know, <a id="page_277" class="calibre7"></a>and where I stand right now, and what the newspaper says this morning, this just isn’t going to happen. Why set our expectations high? Why set ourselves up for disappointment? I’ll tell you something: as far as I can tell, we’ve been praying that Lord’s Prayer for over two thousand years, and so far I haven’t seen a single wolf hanging out with a single lamb. Perhaps we need to modify our demand that God’s Kingdom come a little, just to be on the safe side. Perhaps we could ask, instead, that our kingdoms be <em class="calibre8">improved</em> so that everyone could get a little bread, say, once a week. Instead of forgiveness, we could request tolerance. Instead of deliverance from evil, we could ask for a skill set that would help us manage it better. After all, God knows how we are.</p>
<p class="indent">I remember, once, when I thought God was using me to lift a church out of its cowardly self-improvement mentality and into living in recognition of the new heaven and new earth to which Scripture bears witness. I was twenty-two years old and working as the youth director in a relatively small church in northern New Jersey. When I got there the church had four kids in the senior high youth group. Directly across the street from the church was a high school. While the church was made up predominantly of persons who were white, the school was about equally balanced between students who were white and students who were people of color. One day, a black fifteen-year-old boy killed a white fifteen-year-old boy on the playground. I went to the principal and asked if I could invite any interested students to our next youth group meeting so that they would have opportunity to discuss their grief.</p>
<p class="indent">The next youth group meeting was attended by one hundred high schoolers—more than the average attendance at the Sunday morning worship service. I recruited help from church leaders. Everyone in the church was energized. We all began to imagine the ministry we could have to the community in which the church was located.</p>
<p class="indent">For seven weeks in a row, we had about a hundred kids a week. On the first and second weeks, in the eyes of the church, I was a hero. We imagined the possibilities. We had all kinds of meetings to discuss what kind of programs were needed. We agreed that we had the opportunity to experience the Kingdom of God together with these grieving kids.</p>
<p class="indent"><a id="page_278" class="calibre7"></a>By the third week, our imaginations began to sag. The four kids in the original youth group were naturally becoming disgruntled by our lack of attention to them, given the need to attend to the one hundred. We were having trouble with the high schoolers spitting tobacco into various cups and containers they saw sitting around the church. The extra adult volunteers we had recruited, after two weeks of service, were already running out of steam.</p>
<p class="indent">I was no longer a hero. As I tried to keep the program going almost singlehandedly, resentment grew. Finally, the students from the high school were told directly, by someone in the congregation, that they were not wanted. On week eight we went from a hundred attendees back to the four members of the original youth group. And the pressure was on to forget what had happened and try to get back to the way things were “before.”</p>
<p class="indent">That student wanted to take my 8:30 class, but couldn’t imagine actually getting up. We wanted to help those kids, but couldn’t imagine actually finding a way to do it. As they say back where I’m from (on Long Island): “So whaddya gonna do? You know how people are.”</p>
<p class="indent">People of faith, stepping into hope, have had higher expectations than this. Consider our forebear John Calvin, for example. Or Julian of Norwich, Martin Luther, John Wesley, Martin Luther King Jr., or Rosemary Radford Ruether. It’s hard to imagine that any of these people of faith would have signed that drop slip the student handed me. And I’m betting they would have kept at those church folks, and kept at those high schoolers, far more than I did.</p>
<p class="indent">Calvin, for example, wasn’t big on excusing folks in Geneva for missing class, or missing worship, with the excuse that “you know how we are.” You see, Calvin <em class="calibre8">did</em> know how we are. He knew, as a person of hope, that who we are is actually different from how we act, at least most of the time. He believed sin was an aberration inconsistent with God’s creative and redemptive plan. He believed our lack of imagination is a symptom of a problem, not a reasonable excuse. Do you know that Calvin was far more open to being changed than many of us are? John Calvin, that one who has a reputation for being so dour, set his expectations high. He believed <a id="page_279" class="calibre7"></a>human beings can change, and he believed we are called to implement change in this world. Contrary to popular belief, he had a high view of human nature. He loved to look out at this majestic world that God has created and meditate with wonderment on the fact that the God who made <em class="calibre8">all</em> dearly loves <em class="calibre8">each and every</em> creature.</p>
<p class="indent">It is in and through contemplating and rejoicing in God’s works, in and through imagining all that God is about and all that God has promised, Calvin thought, that we come to be included; that we come to be changed. With the psalmist, Calvin marvels that the God from whom there is no escape, the God who occupies the heavens, and dwells on the other side of the sea, the God who is present even in the depths of Sheol, also attends to us. God knits each one of us together in our mothers’ wombs; God knows every day of our lives before one of them comes to be.<a id="rch9en31" class="calibre7"></a><sup class="calibre12"><a href="notes.xhtml#ch9en31" class="calibre5">31</a></sup> “When I look up at your skies, at what your fingers made—the moon and the stars that you set firmly in place—what are human beings that you think about them; what are human beings that you pay attention to them? You’ve made them only slightly less than divine, crowning them with glory and grandeur.”<a id="rch9en32" class="calibre7"></a><sup class="calibre12"><a href="notes.xhtml#ch9en32" class="calibre5">32</a></sup></p>
<p class="indent">So, you <em class="calibre8">can</em> find a way to get out of bed and make it to class, I’m sure he would say. And you can tell those kids not to chew tobacco in the youth room, or put up with the fact that they do. And you can pray that Lord’s Prayer for what it actually says. And you <em class="calibre8">can</em> bear to imagine a new world so beautiful it is almost unbearable. And in imagining it, you may very well find that you become a vehicle of transformation in it. Don’t aim to change the world, I think Calvin would instruct, but <em class="calibre8">do</em> aim to live in ever-deeper recognition of the world that God desires—of the Kingdom God has promised.</p>
<p class="indent">Live with the reality of God’s world in mind, and this world will become something new. When we are imagining a world in which weeping is no more, we work—even harder—to alleviate suffering. When we are imagining a world in which all injustices are resolved, we ask ourselves questions about everything from the buying of pineapple to the building of our homes. When we are picturing a wolf and a lamb eating side by <a id="page_280" class="calibre7"></a>side, we cannot help but think differently about violence, war, and even how much meat we eat.</p>
<p class="indent">And all this <em class="calibre8">can</em> be pretty exhausting. Reflecting on who we are in relation to God’s wondrous glory, participating in the New Jerusalem who is the well-prepared bride watching for the arrival of the bridegroom takes genuine effort. Anyone who has ever prepared to get married knows that it takes energy, particularly on the days leading up to the wedding. It takes energy to prepare, and it takes even more energy to expect. To courageously hope that dreams will be realized does not come naturally. Hope must be fed, or it will surely die. And it is fed, precisely, by courageously watching for the One who will return and preparing to live in the new heaven and the new earth that God is in the process of creating.</p>
<p class="indent">The book of Revelation urges us not to be “cowardly,” but instead to live our lives as those who, together with the whole church, await reunion with Christ.<a id="rch9en33" class="calibre7"></a><sup class="calibre12"><a href="notes.xhtml#ch9en33" class="calibre5">33</a></sup> To imagine this Kingdom that is our inheritance, and to live in expectation of it. To believe that the God who has entered into existence with us in Jesus Christ will somehow meet us again and bring all that has been promised to full fruition.</p>
<p class="indent">And this one who is the Alpha and Omega will not come as one who asks us to step aside (so he “can show us how it’s done”). He will come, rather, as <em class="calibre8">our God</em>, as <em class="calibre8">our bridegroom</em>, as one who claims us as his own. The one who is seated on the throne will leave the throne, and enter into our lives, and make them into something new. The one who emptied himself and entered the womb of Mary will wipe away our tears. The one who entered into death for us will, finally, put an end to death. The one who rose in body will join his body with ours in final consummation.</p>
<p class="indent">Now, I’m not sure I can spell out the details of what all this means. (As I said way back in the introduction, I have to love that guy who told Jesus, “Yes, Lord, I believe,” but then added, “Help me, Lord, with my unbelief”!). We are not asked to draw lines from the concrete sorrows and joys of our life on this day to the images in these beautiful passages and then figure out how to move from “point A” to “point B.” You see, there is no strategy that can move us from the many tears of this world to the no tears of the kingdom. The movement cannot be <em class="calibre8">from</em> here <em class="calibre8">to</em> there. As <a id="page_281" class="calibre7"></a>my grandfather liked to joke, whenever anyone asked him for directions, “you can’t get there from here.” Rather than starting from <em class="calibre8">here</em>, these images invite us to start from <em class="calibre8">there</em> and see what happens. To imagine the Kingdom of God that (quite frankly) Scripture gives us a lot of help imagining. To give the Holy Spirit a fighting chance to work in us so that we can become the new creations we are in Christ. To stand in wonderment, before the majestic God who has entered into existence with us, that we are fully included. To believe that God, in Christ, is making all things new. A new world without sorrow; a new world without violence. A new world in which everyone gets to live in the houses they have built, and everyone gets to eat the food they have grown. A world in which there is enough work, and enough life, to go around.</p>
<p class="indent">Can you imagine?</p>
<div class="box">
<p class="boxhead">DISCUSS (IN THREE PARTS):</p>
<p class="boxnumber">(1) Brainstorm some things that are hard to imagine, but we want to hope for. For example, we might say:</p>
<p class="dasha">- It’s hard to imagine putting a complete stop to global warming.</p>
<p class="dasha">- It’s hard to imagine an end to all war.</p>
<p class="dasha">- It’s hard to imagine the absence of all racism, sexism, classism, and heterosexism.</p>
<p class="dasha">- It’s hard to imagine food being distributed so equitably that no one dies, any longer, of malnourishment.</p>
<p class="boxnumbert">(2) Consider the ways we put aside our hopes for things that seem impossible in favor of being practical and realistic. For example, we might say:</p>
<p class="dasha">- We can’t put a stop to global warming, but we can significantly decrease our contribution to it.</p>
<p class="dasha">- We will never end <em class="calibre8">all</em> war, but perhaps we can work toward disarmament.</p>
<p class="dasha"><a id="page_282" class="calibre7"></a>- Human beings will never stop discriminating against each other, but we can create better laws and processes to protect people.</p>
<p class="dasha">- We won’t be able to feed everyone, but we can walk in the Crop Walk and raise funds that will be used to get more food to more people.</p>
<p class="boxnumbert">(3) <em class="calibre8">Reflect:</em> Are we hoping for <em class="calibre8">less than</em> the Kingdom of God, in the name of being realistic? If we do focus on being realistic and practical, what loss is there to the faith we hold and to what we have to offer the world as people of hope?</p>
</div>
<h3 class="h2">H<small class="calibre3">OPE AS</small> “P<small class="calibre3">LAYING</small> T<small class="calibre3">OWARD</small>” <small class="calibre3">THE</small> K<small class="calibre3">INGDOM</small></h3>
<p class="indent">I experienced a kind of conversion recently.<a id="rch9en34" class="calibre7"></a><sup class="calibre12"><a href="notes.xhtml#ch9en34" class="calibre5">34</a></sup> I was changed, for a time, into someone who remembers how to find my way into hope for this world. It happened at a band concert given by Murchison Middle School students in Austin. The performance of the seventh and eighth graders was way above average. The final band in the program—the wind ensemble in which our son plays the clarinet—deserved a standing ovation. So I stood, but no one else did. Perhaps I am biased, or maybe just overly affirming. Enthusiasm is both my strength and my weakness, I know. Laughing at myself, I sat back down, still lightly clapping, looking to grab my bag so I would be ready to head out with my family.</p>
<p class="indent">But there was another part to the program, Ms. C., the band director, was explaining. The band, next month, will perform in a competition where they will be required to sight-read a piece. They will be given the music on the spot, then given eight minutes to prepare, then asked to play it through. Ms. C. asked us to watch as the band practiced for this sight-reading event. We all nodded courteously at this request, glancing at our watches to calculate what impact an extra quarter hour would have on our schedules.</p>
<p class="indent">The music was handed out and each kid placed it meticulously on his or her stand without opening it up. Poised on their seats with instruments <a id="page_283" class="calibre7"></a>in the “resting” position, they focused entirely on Ms. C., who was now facing them and trying to settle a music stand that kept slowly sinking down. The assistant band directors scrambled to change it out a couple of times, with Ms. C. making a joke of it all. But the stand kept creeping toward the floor.</p>
<p class="indent">Ms. C. decided to start anyway. She opened the piece on her stand and said something like, “OK, open your music and let’s play.” The students opened their music, but made no move to put instruments to lips or produce any sounds, which made me, I admit, a bit anxious. Ms. C. nonetheless began to conduct, arms raised and moving, humming and gesturing, drawing the students into the piece, measure by measure. The students went right along with her. With instruments still in resting position, their eyes darted back and forth from score to teacher. “Here is the melody; there, a hard rhythm; careful—that’s a B natural; now play up the crescendo. Watch me for the cutoff; engage here with more passion. And now, measure 90—don’t play B-flat! That’s a natural, again.” Every student still riveted, though now not as much to Ms. C. Somehow, you could tell, they had entered the music itself. The audience forgotten, Ms. C. had ushered her students and fellow musicians into a piece they had never seen, had never played. And when the eight-minute timer sounded, Ms. C. stopped, pulled her music stand up again, and invited her company to make the beautiful music that first had claimed them and now had become their own. And they—these thirteen-year-old kids—played out loud, for the very first time, the piece they already knew. They played the music Ms. C. invited them to hear, the music they had entered, the music into which they were now inviting us.</p>
<p class="indent">My tears surprised me, pushing me to interpret the event as an act of grace. I remembered that it is indeed possible for us to be joined in celebration and creation of what is beautiful. I remembered that the way to create beauty is first to participate in it. I remembered that formative teaching doesn’t focus first and foremost on “best practices” or utilizing tools that heighten the possibility of success. It is attuned, rather, to the truth, beauty, and goodness of the subject matter. It insists that we must play B-natural or watch the crescendo in measure 30, for example, not <a id="page_284" class="calibre7"></a>as much to create beautiful music as to synchronize with it. Most importantly, it reminded me that to be people of hope is to “watch and pray” for the Kingdom of God to come, actively looking for it along the way. I almost missed going to that concert, and am so glad I was able to be there, and to be inspired, as a witness to grace breaking through in space and time. What remains is to reflect on how we do even more than witness and imagine the Kingdom, which already takes energy and attention. How do we “lean into it,” even making a contribution to it? How does the hope that is in us affect our engagement with, and contribution to, the keeping of God’s promise to the world?</p>
<p class="indent">We turn to the final chapter with these questions in mind, continuing to examine what it looks like to participate in the Kingdom of God by way of the doctrine of Christian vocation. What might it look like to imagine the Kingdom that manifests our hope, allowing our imagining to give way to action? How do we imagine it so strongly that we believe it into being in what we do? How do we hope so fully that we are transformed into those who contribute to its coming?</p>
</body>
</html>
