<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>Holding Faith</title>
    <meta content="urn:uuid:e0000000-0000-0000-0000-000004415877" name="Adept.expected.resource"/>
    <meta http-equiv="Content-Type" content="text/html; charset=utf-8"/>
  <link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="../../stylesheet.css"/>
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="../../page_styles.css"/>
</head>
  <body class="calibre">
<h2 class="h1"><a id="page_168" class="calibre5"></a><a id="page_169" class="calibre5"></a><a id="ch6" class="calibre5"></a>Chapter Six</h2>
<h2 class="h2a">W<small class="calibre11">HO</small> I<small class="calibre11">S</small> G<small class="calibre11">OD</small> M<small class="calibre11">AKING</small> U<small class="calibre11">S</small> I<small class="calibre11">NTO</small>?</h2>
<h3 class="h3x"><a id="ch6lev1" class="calibre5"></a><em class="calibre13">The Doctrines of Sin and Salvation</em></h3>
<p class="noindent">I like to think there is at least a moment in each of our lives when we see ourselves as God sees us. What I mean is that we glimpse that we are beloved, beautiful, and whole as those who are created and claimed by God, despite the fact that our “on the ground” perception of ourselves is quite antithetical to this. I imagine this realization as a kind of revelation, simultaneously both of our created goodness and value and of the ways in which we fall short of this—the ways in which we, in fact, sin. “All have sinned and fall short of God’s glory,” says Romans.<a id="rch6en1" class="calibre7"></a><sup class="calibre12"><a href="notes.xhtml#ch6en1" class="calibre5">1</a></sup> And we were made in the image of this glorious God, a “little lower than God,” the psalmist says.<a id="rch6en2" class="calibre7"></a><sup class="calibre12"><a href="notes.xhtml#ch6en2" class="calibre5">2</a></sup> To see ourselves as God sees us would fill us, no doubt, with joy, gratitude, and peace. But it would also quickly accentuate the fact that we have fallen short not only of God’s glory, but even of our own. Our joyful recognition of our belovedness, taking in our inconsistent behaviors, would quickly dissipate into Paul’s lament that “the good that I want to do I do not do, and the evil I don’t want to do I do! O wretched [one] that I am! Who can save me from this body of death?”<a id="rch6en3" class="calibre7"></a><sup class="calibre12"><a href="notes.xhtml#ch6en3" class="calibre5">3</a></sup></p>
<p class="indent">Notice that Paul does not think he is an evildoer, plain and simple. Rather, he testifies that he is someone who, in reality, wills to do the good. <a id="page_170" class="calibre7"></a>The fact that he wishes he could act in ways other than how he is acting does not make the fact that he finds himself unable to do the good he wants to do any less of a problem, however. There is a way it even makes it worse—once we see ourselves as God sees us, we can never claim “it wasn’t meant to be” as an excuse for not doing the good we want to do. This is because to see ourselves as God sees us is to see precisely that the evil we do was <em class="calibre8">not</em> meant to be—we were created good and should, really, be able to act in accordance with who we are in Christ. I’m sure Paul did not follow up his lament by reminding himself that, <em class="calibre8">Oh, well. It really wasn’t realistic to expect myself to do the good, anyway. After all, it’s not like I’m superhuman</em>. As it turns out, the fact that we are made and equipped to do the good makes it a bigger problem when we cannot do it. For me not to return a tennis ball for an entire game would be no big deal to anyone who knows me; for Serena Williams it would be inconceivable precisely because it would contradict who she is at her very core. We are made for doing good even more than Serena Williams was made to play tennis—so it is a real problem when we can’t do it!</p>
<p class="indent">This realization that there is a disparity between how God sees us and how we actually live certainly gives way to lament and remorse about sinfulness. It also yields to a deep yearning for healing—the desire to bring our daily lives and behaviors back in sync with the reality of who we are, as those met and made by God. It is here that the doctrine of salvation comes into play. Salvation, in this understanding, is not about rescuing us from being bad, but restoring us to being the good people we were created to be. Included in the work of salvation, then, is <em class="calibre8">forgiveness</em> of certain out-of-sync actualities—the sinful behaviors in which we have engaged that are contrary to the reality of our created existence.<a id="rch6en4" class="calibre7"></a><sup class="calibre12"><a href="notes.xhtml#ch6en4" class="calibre5">4</a></sup> Included, also, are the redemptive actions of God accomplished by Jesus Christ, often referred to, in the history of the Christian faith, as <em class="calibre8">atonement theories</em>. Finally, what cannot be forgotten is the ongoing work of the Holy Spirit, who continues saving us by <em class="calibre8">sanctifying</em> us. The Holy Spirit, as it turns out, never gives up on reconciling who we really are (as those who have been created in the image of God and made righteous in Christ) with who we actually are (as those who act in ways that are neither good nor righteous).</p>
<p class="indent"><a id="page_171" class="calibre7"></a>To be aware of our salvation and to want to live more fully as those who are being met and made by God, is, I would say, close to whatever it means to be “saved.” <em class="calibre8">Salvation</em>, I am thinking, is the ongoing process of perceiving, and living in continuity with, our redemption in Christ. Paul suggests salvation is something we “work out . . . with fear and trembling.”<a id="rch6en5" class="calibre7"></a><sup class="calibre12"><a href="notes.xhtml#ch6en5" class="calibre5">5</a></sup> Kierkegaard, wanting to emphasize that holding faith is not always the easiest thing to do, would never simply call himself a Christian. Instead, emphasizing the character of salvation as ongoing, he liked to say that he was in process of becoming one.<a id="rch6en6" class="calibre7"></a><sup class="calibre12"><a href="notes.xhtml#ch6en6" class="calibre5">6</a></sup></p>
<p class="indent">To realize the discontinuity between who we are in Christ and how we live and act in our day-to-day lives is risky, because it can lead us to discouragement and even to despair. This is because part and parcel to the realization itself is the recognition we cannot correct the problem on our own. Given this, it makes sense that we who are determined to be good and productive people tend to hold the realization at arms’ length, redoubling our efforts to bridge the gap. Instead of resolving the discontinuity, however, we tend to instantiate it by trying to override our wretchedness (or at least by trying to cover it up). The net result of this dynamic, too often, is that we find ourselves living as hypocrites—desperately trying to convince ourselves, and others, that we are the people we know we should be, but actually are not.<a id="rch6en7" class="calibre7"></a><sup class="calibre12"><a href="notes.xhtml#ch6en7" class="calibre5">7</a></sup> Ironically, it seems to me, the hypocrisy of us Christians is usually founded in a sincere desire for a kind of consistency we (with Paul) just don’t seem able to pull off. In other words, most Christians don’t become hypocrites by trying to fake people out about who they are. Rather, they start out trying to be who they think they should be, but inevitably fail to be good enough. This failing to be who we want to be, when it is not admitted, confessed, and corrected, is what hardens into hypocrisy.</p>
<p class="indent">We have mentioned that hypocrisy is cited as a major reason the Nones are uninterested in being involved in institutional churches. They generally recognize churchgoers as hypocritical, not living out what they claim to believe. To the degree to which this analysis is accurate, churchgoers need be corrected. Hypocrisy is something Jesus also has no patience for, comparing those he identifies as hypocrites with “whitewashed tombs,”<a id="rch6en8" class="calibre7"></a><sup class="calibre12"><a href="notes.xhtml#ch6en8" class="calibre5">8</a></sup> <a id="page_172" class="calibre7"></a>or coffins that look good on the outside, but actually have corpses rotting on the inside. The path out of hypocrisy—the path toward salvation—Jesus teaches, begins with the confession that how we live and act doesn’t begin to measure up to who we are in the eyes of God, in and through Jesus Christ. Jesus is always trying to precipitate such admittance from hypocrites not in order to shame them, but to free them to move toward recognition of who they are, as children of God. When they want to stone the woman caught in adultery, for example, Jesus suggests that “the one who is without sin” throw the first stone.<a id="rch6en9" class="calibre7"></a><sup class="calibre12"><a href="notes.xhtml#ch6en9" class="calibre5">9</a></sup> “First take the log out of your eye,” he instructs, “and then you’ll see clearly to take the splinter out of your brother’s or sister’s eye.”<a id="rch6en10" class="calibre7"></a><sup class="calibre12"><a href="notes.xhtml#ch6en10" class="calibre5">10</a></sup></p>
<p class="indent">Encouragingly, religious people are often quite eager to rid themselves of hypocrisy, both in themselves and in their communities. It is common to hear, for example, in evangelical Christian circles, the exhortation to “walk the walk” and not just “talk the talk.” Similarly, the WWJD movement I mentioned previously insists Christians act in ways consistent with who they claim to be, as disciples of Jesus Christ.</p>
<p class="indent">In ecumenical circles, similarly, the challenge is often made to demonstrate “visible unity” to the world.<a id="rch6en11" class="calibre7"></a><sup class="calibre12"><a href="notes.xhtml#ch6en11" class="calibre5">11</a></sup> Again, there is the acknowledgment that it is not enough to claim “they will know we are Christians by our love”<a id="rch6en12" class="calibre7"></a><sup class="calibre12"><a href="notes.xhtml#ch6en12" class="calibre5">12</a></sup>—we need, actually, to show the world we <em class="calibre8">do</em> love by way of loving acts. Taking seriously the charge of hypocrisy, members of the World Council of Churches and the World Alliance of Reformed Churches (for example) work to discover and promote common worship practices among Christians as well as to host bi-lateral dialogues where representatives of different worshipping bodies can come together to discuss how common commitments to justice can push us forward in acting lovingly in the world.</p>
<p class="indent">Following these lines of thinking, salvation at its fullest might be understood as the healing of the discontinuity with which we struggle to the point where the details of our historical existence are completely in sync with the reality of our created goodness. This would mean that the redemption for which “all creation groans”<a id="rch6en13" class="calibre7"></a><sup class="calibre12"><a href="notes.xhtml#ch6en13" class="calibre5">13</a></sup> is the state in which all creation can be itself, as God made it and intended it to be.<a id="rch6en14" class="calibre7"></a><sup class="calibre12"><a href="notes.xhtml#ch6en14" class="calibre5">14</a></sup> It would <a id="page_173" class="calibre7"></a>be—finally—the granting of what we cry out for when we say the Lord’s Prayer. “Thy Kingdom come!” we demand. “Thy will be done, on earth as it is in heaven.” The coming of heaven to earth is what salvation looks like when each of us is so attuned to who we are in Christ that we actually do what God wills we should do.</p>
<h3 class="h2">S<small class="calibre3">ALVATION AS</small> F<small class="calibre3">REEDOM</small></h3>
<p class="indent">Understood in this way, salvation is also freedom. The Apostle Paul, I believe, would cry “Amen” to that. I say this because what he describes, when he calls himself “wretched,” is the common experience we people of faith have of being <em class="calibre8">not</em> free—unable to be who we want ourselves to be. Martin Luther describes our predicament, in this regard, as “bondage of the will.”<a id="rch6en15" class="calibre7"></a><sup class="calibre12"><a href="notes.xhtml#ch6en15" class="calibre5">15</a></sup> We are not able, Luther thought, in and of ourselves, to garner together enough wherewithal to overcome our propensity to sin and be who we are as created by God and redeemed by Christ. Our wills are freed to act in accordance with who God created us to be only by way of God’s graceful action, the work of salvation.</p>
<p class="indent">One of the challenges we have in grasping how freedom frees us is that our cultural understanding of freedom is different than how we are defining it here, in relation to the spiritual disparity in which we find ourselves. The Western world tends to link freedom, for good reason, to the availability of choices. The more options we have, the more freedom we have—or assume we have—particularly in American culture. Think of car commercials, where purchasing certain vehicles is associated with being able to drive anywhere one wants to go. To buy a certain car is to buy freedom, we are told, because this car expands our range of options. To have fewer or no choices is, by contrast, to be in a kind of bondage—confined, limited, and certainly less free than one <em class="calibre8">could</em> be if one had the right car!</p>
<p class="indent">Spiritually speaking, the bondage that is antithetical to freedom cannot be accounted for simply by lamenting a paucity of choices. As aggravating as it can be not to have options, what is most maddening of <a id="page_174" class="calibre7"></a>all is not to be able to make choices we do have, but somehow aren’t able to take. Paul cries out in anguish, apparently faced with options that are right before him but that he is somehow not able to embrace. Strangely but commonly enough, he behaves instead in accordance with what he does not want. Nothing is stopping him from choosing the good, in other words, except his own propensity to choose the evil he does not want to choose. It is this choosing—against who we are and what we want—that is the bondage of personal sin as Paul is describing it. Salvation from such sin, by contrast, looks like us being able to choose in ways that are consistent with who God made us to be and who we want to be, in our actual lives. People of faith have long hoped for the day when our salvation is complete because it is then that we will suffer no longer even one iota of wretchedness—we will be so utterly free to choose to be who we are that making choices against who God created us to be will not even be a possibility. As Augustine describes it, at this point of completion we will be “free to choose for the good always.”<a id="rch6en16" class="calibre7"></a><sup class="calibre12"><a href="notes.xhtml#ch6en16" class="calibre5">16</a></sup></p>
<p class="indent">There is another kind of bondage that can result from personal bondage to sin. This bondage affects not only those who cannot (and often do not even want to) make the right choices, but also those who are affected by the bad choices being made. It is the bondage of some by others who, acting in accordance with their own bondage to sin, actually work to limit the options and choices of those around them. Classically, for example, slaveholders work to limit the choices offered to slaves in order to keep them captive.</p>
<p class="indent">Whatever redemption is, I believe it includes the healing both of the bondage of our wills and the oppression of some by others. Sometimes, theologians associate these two kinds of bondage with <em class="calibre8">personal sin</em> and <em class="calibre8">corporate sin</em> (or <em class="calibre8">systemic sin</em>), respectively. This can be useful as long as it is remembered that the two cannot be separated—it is the personal sins of individuals that shape corrupt institutions in which the lives of some are used up to enhance the lives of others. But then, to be sure, institutions and systems take on a life of their own, or at least it feels that way. They are dependent on the flourishing of hypocrites, those who are best able to ignore or justify the harm they are doing, and so they promote bondage of <a id="page_175" class="calibre7"></a>the will as a way to fund oppressive dynamics that ensure the most powerful continue to have power over others.<a id="rch6en17" class="calibre7"></a><sup class="calibre12"><a href="notes.xhtml#ch6en17" class="calibre5">17</a></sup></p>
<p class="indent">The idea that God desires <em class="calibre8">both</em> personal sin and corporate sin to be redeemed is consistent with the biblical witness all the way through. In the Old Testament, for example, there are requests for personal healing, such as David’s appeal that the Lord “create . . . a clean heart, filled with right desires.” And there are commands, throughout, to take care of those who have been impoverished by broken systems. “Establish justice,” Amos tells us, for example, warning us that neglecting the “poor” and the “needy” will have dire consequences.<a id="rch6en18" class="calibre7"></a><sup class="calibre12"><a href="notes.xhtml#ch6en18" class="calibre5">18</a></sup> In the New Testament, similarly, Jesus’s work of redemption touches and heals both sinners and those who are sinned against. “I’ve come to set the captives free,” he says, listing the poor, the blind, and the oppressed as those who will be “released.”<a id="rch6en19" class="calibre7"></a><sup class="calibre12"><a href="notes.xhtml#ch6en19" class="calibre5">19</a></sup> Interestingly, Christians in good faith have interpreted Jesus’s words, historically, both as applying to personal sin and as applying to corporate sin. Sometimes they have even argued about which is Jesus’s greater concern. My view is that this in particular is something of a wasted argument, since what is clear is that both personal and corporate sin are symptoms of brokenness, and both are and will be healed.</p>
<h3 class="h2">I<small class="calibre3">S</small> S<small class="calibre3">ALVATION</small> R<small class="calibre3">EALLY</small> N<small class="calibre3">ECESSARY, IF</small> A<small class="calibre3">LL</small> A<small class="calibre3">RE</small> M<small class="calibre3">ET AND</small> M<small class="calibre3">ADE BY</small> G<small class="calibre3">OD</small>?</h3>
<p class="indent">At this point it might be important to step back for a moment from different types of sin and acknowledge straightforwardly that the understanding of salvation that is operative in this chapter and this book is not one founded in the idea that some are simply <em class="calibre8">in</em> and others are simply <em class="calibre8">out</em>, when it comes to the Kingdom of God. As has been suggested in prior chapters, the hope is that all have been met in the coming of the Word made flesh, and that all have been made good in the image of the triune God. In relation to the incarnation and creation, then, all are accounted for.<a id="rch6en20" class="calibre7"></a><sup class="calibre12"><a href="notes.xhtml#ch6en20" class="calibre5">20</a></sup> On the basis of this confession of God’s grace Barth is reported to <a id="page_176" class="calibre7"></a>have suggested to Christians that they “hope everyone makes it in the end and preach as though hell is real.” Supporting this recommendation is an interpretation of Philippians 2:10-11 framed not in terms of Christian triumphalism, but rather by God’s relentless determination to include everyone. “Every knee will bend; every tongue confess,”<a id="rch6en21" class="calibre7"></a><sup class="calibre12"><a href="notes.xhtml#ch6en21" class="calibre5">21</a></sup> the Scripture says, which we might do well to interpret as meaning no one will be left behind. Now, it is important to be clear: a human being is no more authorized to declare that everyone makes it in the end than he or she is licensed to determine who is <em class="calibre8">in</em> and who is <em class="calibre8">out</em> of whatever constitutes God’s eternal Kingdom. It is only the sovereign God who decides such matters. If we are to hope that everyone is included, it is solely because we understand full inclusion to be consistent with the character of the sovereign God who is unconditionally loving and unfathomably gracious.</p>
<p class="indent">The redemption of sin, however, is in the business of something more than issuing “fire insurance,” as I sometimes like to joke. In other words, it is not only—and perhaps not even primarily—concerned with the matter of creating a way for people who deserve to go to hell to go to heaven instead. Rather, it is God’s work of making it possible for people to be the beautiful creatures God made them to be, in fellowship with the triune God, by way of their brother, Jesus Christ, in the power of the Holy Spirit. “Fire insurance” will—I hope!—be included in all this, but the focus of redemption should not be merely escaping punishment, but also enjoying God’s gift of abundant life. God’s work of redemption saves us not only <em class="calibre8">from</em> something but also <em class="calibre8">for</em> something—life in God, through Jesus Christ, by the power of the Holy Spirit.</p>
<h3 class="h2">S<small class="calibre3">ALVATION AND</small> U<small class="calibre3">NIVERSALISM</small></h3>
<p class="indent">If the understanding of redemption being presented isn’t in the business of dividing up those who are somehow <em class="calibre8">in</em> and those who are <em class="calibre8">out</em>, some may ask, isn’t it simply a form of universalism? If all are, objectively speaking, met and made by God, doesn’t this mean all are, whether they <a id="page_177" class="calibre7"></a>know it or not, already “saved”? And if our conviction is that the salvation of all is, in reality, already accomplished, what is left to do? Why even think about salvation at all?</p>
<p class="indent">Already we have begun to answer this question, at least indirectly, in the first few pages of this chapter. Salvation is not only about God making provision for us, but also about us living into an awareness of what it is God has done. We are in bondage when we do not remember that we have been made and met, when we forget that we are created good and claimed by God in Jesus Christ. Insofar as we know ourselves before the God who has met and made us, on the other hand, we are able to live the abundant life God desires for us.<a id="rch6en22" class="calibre7"></a><sup class="calibre12"><a href="notes.xhtml#ch6en22" class="calibre5">22</a></sup> There is a sense in which we who are saved by God no matter what are also <em class="calibre8">not</em> saved whenever we lose sight of who we are. This does not mean that if we were to die in the moments of our forgetting we would go to hell. What it does mean is that we are less free in our daily life whenever we lose sight of God’s meeting and making of us.</p>
<p class="indent">Karl Barth explains it this way:</p>
<p class="blockquotet">Reality which does not become truth for us obviously cannot affect us, however supreme may be its ontological dignity. . . . It will necessarily remain unattested on our side—a word which has no answer, a light which has no reflection. Unrecognized, the love of God in Jesus Christ cannot awaken and summon us to its attestation and therefore to a response of love.<a id="rch6en23" class="calibre7"></a><sup class="calibre12"><a href="notes.xhtml#ch6en23" class="calibre5">23</a></sup></p>
<p class="noindentt">A word with no answer; a light with no reflection. It is hard to imagine how this could be the case, but there is a definite sense in which we human agents have the power to contribute to the dynamics of the divine revelation by way of whether or not we recognize the reality of God’s love.</p>
<p class="indent">The character of any decision we make regarding our own salvation is explained quite straightforwardly by Barth. What we decide, he explains, is not whether or not we have been met and made by God, but whether or not we will live our lives in light of the decision that has been made on our behalf. While this life decision is really ours, Barth explains, “it . . . cannot precede but can only follow the decision already taken in Jesus Christ.”<a id="rch6en24" class="calibre7"></a><sup class="calibre12"><a href="notes.xhtml#ch6en24" class="calibre5">24</a></sup></p>
<p class="indent"><a id="page_178" class="calibre7"></a>I have been helped, in trying to envision how God’s redemptive work is and isn’t related to our conscious participation in it, by the following analogy: Imagine, if you would, that you love someone (a lover, a child, a friend) with a love so great that nothing can take it away—even your beloved one’s rejection of it. But now imagine that the person whom you love is not living their life with an awareness that they are loved by you. You have told that person that you love them in all the ways you know how, but somehow they don’t seem to have absorbed it. You genuinely believe—you <em class="calibre8">know</em>, in fact—that if they only recognized how much they are loved by you, their whole life could be different, better, richer. Imagine that your primary concern, in proclaiming your unconditional love for this one, is not to receive the “I love you return”<a id="rch6en25" class="calibre7"></a><sup class="calibre12"><a href="notes.xhtml#ch6en25" class="calibre5">25</a></sup> (although of course you want this). It is, rather, that that person know the gift of your unconditional love, and all the blessings that correspond with it.</p>
<p class="indent">Your love for this person, it is clear, will endure whether this person recognizes it and lives in relation to it or not. But imagine what would happen if and when this person acknowledged it. In one sense, nothing would be different (because the love you have would be the same love that was present even before the recognition). At the same time, everything would be different (because the person would be transformed by the love extended to them, which would give you great joy).</p>
<p class="indent">God’s love for us, demonstrated in the ways God meets us and makes us, is the reality that frames our existence whether we recognize it or not. But when “the reality becomes truth for us,”<a id="rch6en26" class="calibre7"></a><sup class="calibre12"><a href="notes.xhtml#ch6en26" class="calibre5">26</a></sup> everything changes. We experience life abundant. It is when we recognize the reality of God’s love that the blessings of redemption are ours, and that we have the hope of living free lives that are consistent, in actuality, with who we really are as God’s children.</p>
<p class="indent">Interestingly, this way of understanding salvation avoids buying into an easy universalism while at the same time eschewing any problematic tendency we might have to divide the world up into insiders and outsiders. Avoiding an easy universalism is important to those of us who have experienced and witnessed the ways faith claims make a difference to our lives and the life of the world. To say, simply, that “everyone makes it in the <a id="page_179" class="calibre7"></a>end, so why worry, really, about the space between here and there” does a disservice not only to the legacy of Christendom but also to the transformative experiences of those who have “held faith” down through the ages and found that their conscious Christian convictions have shaped their very lives. People of faith from contexts as wide-ranging as the fourth-century African-born theologian Augustine to the fifth-century Greek mathematician philosopher Pythagoras of Samos; from the eighteenth-century philosopher René Descartes to nineteenth-century American slaves who sang, “we’ve come this far by faith”;<a id="rch6en27" class="calibre7"></a><sup class="calibre12"><a href="notes.xhtml#ch6en27" class="calibre5">27</a></sup> from philosopher Simone Weil to Pulitzer prize-winning author Marilynne Robinson—all testify to the ways in which experiences of Christianity made specific, life-changing demands on their lives and their plans.</p>
<h3 class="h2">W<small class="calibre3">HAT</small> K<small class="calibre3">EEPS</small> U<small class="calibre3">S FROM</small> B<small class="calibre3">EING</small> S<small class="calibre3">AVED</small>? S<small class="calibre3">IN AND</small> F<small class="calibre3">INITUDE</small></h3>
<p class="indent">If salvation is about syncing who we actually are (in our day-to-day, on the ground lives) with who we really are (as those created by God and beloved), what’s the big hold up? Shouldn’t the fact that we are met and made by God facilitate the syncing? Why can’t we just realize what it means to be met by the one who has entered into existence with us and made good in God’s own image, living our lives according to these framing ways of self-understanding? If being met and made by God is, finally, both a done deal and consistent with who we really are, why is the reality, reassurance, and challenge of it so difficult to lean into? Why is it so hard to recognize the reality as truth for us? What keeps us from being saved, if salvation includes recognizing the redemption that is already ours?</p>
<p class="indent">Traditionally, the answer to this question has been: sin gets in the way. We don’t want to give up control, we hypothesize. We would rather be the gods of our own life than to recognize ourselves as those who are met and made by God, and therefore as mere creatures. To know ourselves before God is to know we are <em class="calibre8">not</em> God, we explain. This is a problem if we <a id="page_180" class="calibre7"></a>imagine we want to <em class="calibre8">be</em> God, or at least a god to ourselves. In wanting to be our own gods we are guilty of pride, we say, treating pride as the fundamental sin. So closely aligned is pride with sin, in fact, that sometimes we understand the two to be synonymous.</p>
<p class="indent">There is probably a lot of truth to the idea that what keeps us from knowing our redemption is primarily the sin we know as pride. But saying “pride gets in the way” of our acknowledgment of who we are in relation to the God who has made and met us oversimplifies the condition from which we need to be redeemed. For one thing, not all sin can be described as pride, as we will discuss further in a moment. Additionally, identifying and describing our sin—whether as “pride” or as anything else—still doesn’t get to its root. What is it, exactly, that plagues us? If we indeed want to be in control, <em class="calibre8">why</em> is this the case? Why do we play God rather than receive the true freedom that is extended to us, freedom that allows us to be the wonderfully made, beloved and claimed creatures we are?</p>
<p class="indent">It may help, in answering this question, to think of sin as emerging from the condition of bondage in which we find ourselves, as the Apostle Paul testifies and as we have been describing it in the last few pages. The theologian Paul Tillich, along these lines, identifies sin with <em class="calibre8">estrangement</em>—the experience of feeling alienated from the source of all things, the “Ground of All Being” with which we desperately desire to feel connected.<a id="rch6en28" class="calibre7"></a><sup class="calibre12"><a href="notes.xhtml#ch6en28" class="calibre5">28</a></sup> Tillich notes that, while we of course <em class="calibre8">are</em>, in reality, inextricably connected to the “Ground of All Being,” we inevitably feel as though we are not. Why is this? Because, he says, when we encounter this one who is infinite, our limitations as creatures are accentuated. Because of this, we inevitably feel distanced from that to which we are inextricably connected. The Ground of All Being is immortal, but we, being mortal and finite, will die. This troubles us since—face-to-face with the unlimited One—we realize death is not the only possibility. Somehow, it just doesn’t seem right to us that we should die. And so, we fight our creatureliness.</p>
<p class="indent">I like to use, as a humorous example of this, a clip from the popular 1980s sitcom <em class="calibre8">Cheers</em>. In the scene, psychiatrist couple Frasier and Lilith are sitting at a bar, discussing their will. “So, who gets the wok?” Lilith asks, all business. “Look, darling,” Frasier says, “I find this entire will discussion <a id="page_181" class="calibre7"></a>troubling. It’s not easy to talk about one’s mortality. . . . We’re talking about death here! My death, your death, the end of everything! . . . I know it’s irrational,” he admits, “but I can’t help feeling that if you talk about it, it’ll happen.” “Well, Frasier,” Lilith says, “it <em class="calibre8">will</em> happen.” “Stop it!” Frasier cries. “What?” Lilith insists. “Do you think if I hadn’t mentioned it, you’d live forever?” “Well,” Frasier responds, “now we’ll never know, will we?”<a id="rch6en29" class="calibre7"></a><sup class="calibre12"><a href="notes.xhtml#ch6en29" class="calibre5">29</a></sup></p>
<p class="indent">What makes this exchange funny is that many of us can resonate with it. We often avoid facing our mortality—the mortality of ourselves, of others, and of all things—because, oddly enough, given that everything comes to an end—death seems “out of sync” with how things should be. And so sometimes we deal with it by not talking about it, as if that would make our mortality go away. I have a friend, Tina, fifty-three years old with stage-four colon cancer and a great sense of humor. She tells me that many people either avoid mentioning her cancer or talk as though she will soon be cured when they talk to her, as if they can keep her alive a little longer if they pretend what is happening isn’t really happening. Contemplation of our mortality, as Frasier points out, is upsetting. But, as Tina insists, to let go of our denial allows us to live freely and joyfully as the limited but beautiful creatures we are.</p>
<p class="indent">Tillich argues, along these same lines, that when we resist the freedom that comes with recognizing we are creatures who are met and made by God, we are actually resisting our <em class="calibre8">finitude</em>.<a id="rch6en30" class="calibre7"></a><sup class="calibre12"><a href="notes.xhtml#ch6en30" class="calibre5">30</a></sup> Made in the image of God, we recognize and value the infinite and so try to overpower that which is antithetical to it. While the finitude itself is no sin, fighting it leads us to sinful behaviors. Denying our finitude because we want to be more like the Ground in which we participate, we pump ourselves up and act as if we are immortal (Tillich calls this the sin of <em class="calibre8">hubris</em>, or pride). Or we might conceptualize everyone in orbit around us, or imagine ourselves as movie stars around which all other actors in a movie need be orchestrated, attempting to draw others into our narratives more as supporting players than as agents in their own right. Tillich calls this form of sin <em class="calibre8">concupiscence</em>, a term that is rarely used in common parlance, today, although the sin itself appears to run rampant. Or we might try, Tillich notes, simply turning our backs on God altogether. On some level, he suggests, we hope <a id="page_182" class="calibre7"></a>that <em class="calibre8">turning away</em> will get the infinite out of our line of vision so we don’t have to process our finitude, by contrast. The sin of “turning away” looks the most innocuous but is actually the most serious of the three instances of sin, in Tillich’s conceptualization, given that it ignores our grounding in God.</p>
<p class="indent">What keeps us from living in light of being met and made by God, then, according to Tillich, are indeed the sins of <em class="calibre8">hubris</em>, concupiscence, and turning away that are manifestations of our resistance to being who we really are as God’s beloved creatures. But the setup to all of these is, again, the fact of our creatureliness itself. While there is nothing wrong with finitude, since it is part and parcel of God’s good creation, we really don’t like it. Some have suggested that the struggle we have with mortality, as those who are cognizant of the divine, is what is distinctive about being made in the image of God. Cats don’t seem to pause and reflect on the fact that they will one day die, wishing that they wouldn’t. Though they may misbehave, it is hard to argue that they actually sin, at least in the ways Tillich delineates. They seem to have less trouble being who they are as cats, than we human beings do being human. Perhaps there is an alpha cat who appears to be guilty of the sin of concupiscence, placing other cats around him. But it would probably be pushing our luck to argue that the reason this cat is so self-glorifying is because he is looking for ways to deny his finitude.</p>
<p class="indent">Because Tillich’s approach to the problem from which we need redemption focuses more on the condition of our sinfulness than on the particular sins rooted in it, his reflections on the human condition often resonate with groups of people who feel estranged, including those whose sins look quite different than pride, concupiscence, or unbelief. James Cone writes, for example, that American blacks understand what Tillich means when he talks about the “existential risk” associated with being people of faith, insisting that “the meaning and fulfillment of our lives is at stake.” This is because, Cone suggests, “in the black world, no one takes life for granted: every moment of being is surrounded with the threat of nonbeing.”<a id="rch6en31" class="calibre7"></a><sup class="calibre12"><a href="notes.xhtml#ch6en31" class="calibre5">31</a></sup></p>
<p class="indent"><a id="page_183" class="calibre7"></a>All of us are finite beings, but we manage our finitude in varying ways. Those in positions of privilege tend to deny their finitude on the basis of whiteness, maleness, or material wealth. Those who are consistently discriminated against on the basis of race, gender, or class are more likely to be overcome by the forces of finitude or to be unable to hide it by way of hypocrisy. For people who are black, Cone, Martin Luther King Jr., JoAnne Terrell, and other African American and African theologians suggest, the recognition of finitude and its corresponding mortality can be so overwhelming that there can be a kind of “giving up” that looks quite the opposite of pride, concupiscence, or turning away. Nelson Mandela commonly named this form of response to feelings of estrangement, when exhorting audiences comprised primarily of black persons in South Africa. Making famous a poem written by Marianne Williamson, he on a number of occasions asserted: “Our greatest fear is not that we are inadequate. Our greatest fear is that we are powerful beyond measure.” “We ask ourselves,” he would continue, still using Williamson’s words, “Who am I to be brilliant, talented, fabulous? Actually, who are you not to be? You are a child of God. Your playing small doesn’t serve the world.”<a id="rch6en32" class="calibre7"></a><sup class="calibre12"><a href="notes.xhtml#ch6en32" class="calibre5">32</a></sup> Clearly, the sins Mandela named with these words looked very different than the sins named by Tillich, even if they all grew out of experiences of estrangement.</p>
<p class="indent">This idea that the sins that seem to stand in the way of our recognizing we are met and made by God can vary, depending on who we are and what demographic we come from, has also been noticed and developed by many feminist theologians. As far back as 1960, in fact, Valerie Saiving published an article that suggested women do not resonate as readily as men do with the idea that the fundamental sin is “pride.”<a id="rch6en33" class="calibre7"></a><sup class="calibre12"><a href="notes.xhtml#ch6en33" class="calibre5">33</a></sup> Judith Plaskow, twenty years later, applied Saiving’s thesis to Tillich and Niebuhr, arguing that the theologies of these formative male theologians could be expanded to take the experiences of women into account, in teachings about sin and salvation.<a id="rch6en34" class="calibre7"></a><sup class="calibre12"><a href="notes.xhtml#ch6en34" class="calibre5">34</a></sup> In showing what this would look like, Saiving and Plaskow identified the sins they thought were more common to women as <em class="calibre8">feminine sin</em>. They argued that women are much more likely to think of themselves as <em class="calibre8">less</em> than they really are, rather than as <em class="calibre8">more</em> than they are. If men tend to attempt to override their estrangement by acting <a id="page_184" class="calibre7"></a>as though they are god-like, Saiving and Plaskow suggest, women tend simply to fold in the face of it, so convinced of the truth of their unworthiness (relative to the infinite God) that they act as though it is pious and humble simply to give up.</p>
<p class="indent">In my experience in teaching theology, I have found this category of “feminine sin” to be very useful because it resonates both with women and with men. Women are relieved to have a way of articulating, in a way that seems more consistent with their experiences and feelings, that which stands in the way of recognizing their redemption. Men who care about women—particularly men who are pastors and want to minister to women whose experiences are in some ways different than their own, feel they now have a broader way not only of naming sin, but of understanding a range of human experiences and spiritual struggles. And—very importantly—just as women can be and often are guilty of pride, so men are sometimes guilty of self-deprecation. In other words, “feminine sin” isn’t only a sin with which women struggle, even if it is more commonly identified with women than with men.<a id="rch6en35" class="calibre7"></a><sup class="calibre12"><a href="notes.xhtml#ch6en35" class="calibre5">35</a></sup></p>
<p class="indent">What stands in the way of our living into our redemption, then, is whatever keeps us from recognizing the reality of who we are as those who have been met and made by God. Whether we try to be our own gods or we melt down in the face of God’s gracious claim on us, we have not yet experienced the fullness of salvation that is only ours once we appropriate it. The bottom line is that the reason we have so much trouble recognizing that we are met and made, beloved and good, is because we—unlike God—are finite. Our limitations, as creatures before God, are not readily accepted as <em class="calibre8">good</em>, which is why we respond either by trying to override them or by giving up. Following Tillich’s reasoning, to work out our salvation entails embracing our finitude, reveling in the gifts of our creaturely existence.</p>
<p class="indent">This is what Jesus did, as the one who entered fully into our creaturely reality with us. When, early in his ministry, the devil tried to tempt him to override his limitations by turning stones into bread, Jesus resisted the sins of pride and concupiscence. When, at the end of his life, he was struggling in the Garden of Gethsemane, he did not simply dissolve in the face of the <a id="page_185" class="calibre7"></a>Father’s will. Rather, he held on to a strong sense of self even as he submitted to the will of God, saying not “my will is irrelevant and pointless,” but rather “not my will, but yours be done.”<a id="rch6en36" class="calibre7"></a><sup class="calibre12"><a href="notes.xhtml#ch6en36" class="calibre5">36</a></sup></p>
<p class="indent">With Jesus, then, we who groan for redemption might work, in our spirituality, at neither blocking out the conditions of our estrangement nor collapsing into them, but rather recognizing who we are as those who have been met in these conditions by the Christ who reminds us of our goodness and value. This said, there is still a piece we have to consider, and that is: What is the place of Christ’s actual work—his life, death, and resurrection? Is there a need for <em class="calibre8">atonement</em>, related to salvation? Or is salvation mainly about following in Christ’s footsteps, working to live as who we are rather than committing sins on one side or the other of our creaturely existence?</p>
<h3 class="h2">S<small class="calibre3">ALVATION AND</small> A<small class="calibre3">TONEMENT</small><a id="rch6en37" class="calibre5"></a><sup class="calibre16"><a href="notes.xhtml#ch6en37" class="calibre5">37</a></sup></h3>
<p class="indent">People who hold faith have always recognized salvation is not accomplished by sheer consciousness-raising. If it were possible for us simply to ward off all manner of sins and realize who we are as beloved and good creatures, we would have done it by now. People of faith have noted that this problem of wretchedness Paul describes, even as it is parsed out later by theologians such as Tillich, is impossible to conquer on our own. Calvin believes we have nothing whatsoever to contribute to our redemption, naming our incapacity to recognize God in our own total depravity. Aquinas and Wesley, however, both think we have something to contribute to the redemptive process: Aquinas thinks we have the capacity to discern an intelligence behind the natural world; Wesley thinks we <em class="calibre8">decide</em> to reach out and take God’s gift of forgiveness. But all these theologians agree that, regardless of humanity’s capacity or incapacity to contribute to their salvation, we cannot accomplish it on our own. All agree, in fact, that we need the help of God, as it is extended to us in God’s many gracious acts. Most explicitly, however, they argue that we need the help of God as it <a id="page_186" class="calibre7"></a>is extended to us in the acts of God in Jesus Christ. It is through his life, death, and resurrection, they believe, that atonement is made for our sins. It is this atonement that makes it possible for the barriers of all sins to be broken and for us to know where we stand in relationship to God.</p>
<p class="indent">Today, there is a great deal of controversy surrounding the doctrine of atonement and its relationship to salvation. If salvation is in the business of healing whatever is broken about our relationship to God, atonement would be about paying any of the costs that emerge in the process of that healing. At the extreme, there are those who argue that atonement theories are not really needed, that no costs need to be paid, that it is in fact damaging to talk about atonement for sins because it works against the idea that nothing could ever separate us from God’s love for us and presence with us—certainly not any penalties, which God would have the capacity to forgive, anyway. What we need, they say, is less emphasis on our sinfulness and more on our created goodness. If we can focus more on what is good about us, without spending such a great deal of time wallowing in our sinfulness and debating about how it is that Jesus saves us from it and how he doesn’t,<a id="rch6en38" class="calibre7"></a><sup class="calibre12"><a href="notes.xhtml#ch6en38" class="calibre5">38</a></sup> some argue, we will be able to more productively focus our energies on promoting life, rather than protecting ourselves against punishment and death by covering ourselves with guilt and shame.<a id="rch6en39" class="calibre7"></a><sup class="calibre12"><a href="notes.xhtml#ch6en39" class="calibre5">39</a></sup></p>
<p class="indent">A major concern of those questioning atonement theory is the history of ways in which the cross has been used to justify or perpetuate abuse. Historically, the cross has been carried by the Crusaders of the Middle Ages, by members of the Ku Klux Klan, and by Nazi soldiers. Survivors of domestic violence frequently testify that pastors have sent them back home to their abusers with the instruction that they should “bear the cross” they have been given, even as Jesus has. And the idea that the Father would send the Son to die, and that this was somehow necessary for the Father to be able to forgive us, has been identified by some thinkers as “divine child abuse.”<a id="rch6en40" class="calibre7"></a><sup class="calibre12"><a href="notes.xhtml#ch6en40" class="calibre5">40</a></sup> While this might seem like an extreme statement, its antecedents were recognizable all the way back in the twelfth century, when Peter Abélard complained about Anselm’s theory.<a id="rch6en41" class="calibre7"></a><sup class="calibre12"><a href="notes.xhtml#ch6en41" class="calibre5">41</a></sup></p>
<p class="indent">Faced with these ambiguities related to the cross, what tack should we take in exploring what it means to be redeemed, and what role Jesus’s life, <a id="page_187" class="calibre7"></a>death, and resurrection plays (or does not play) in this process? I propose that a good place to begin is with the three most well-known atonement theories themselves. What do each of these tell us about how Jesus saves us? What can be learned, and what should be discarded as unhelpful or, even, destructive? In my view, each of the major approaches to atonement has something valuable to contribute to our understanding of salvation, and they are not mutually exclusive. When all three are considered in tandem, in fact, we have a much fuller and richer understanding of the ways in which we are healed, in the course of our redemption in and through the saving work of Jesus Christ.</p>
<p class="indent">By way of background: unlike in the case of the doctrine of incarnation and the doctrine of the Trinity, there has never been a church council that has determined a standard of orthodoxy for understanding atonement theory. In other words, when we think of the relevance of the “Word made flesh,” we consider it in relation to the Nicene idea that Jesus Christ is <em class="calibre8">homoousios</em> with the Father and the Chalcedonian (“fully human; fully divine”). When we think of God’s triunity we bear in mind the statement that God is, simultaneously, the one who is three and the three who is one (“one <em class="calibre8">ousia</em>; three <em class="calibre8">hypostases</em>”). But when we consider atonement, as it relates to redemption, there is no council that made any determination, no statement that serves as a reference point. The reference point is the cross itself, and the life, death, and resurrection of Jesus Christ in which it is situated.</p>
<p class="indent">Thinking about this figure of Jesus Christ, who he is, and what it is he saves us <em class="calibre8">from</em> and <em class="calibre8">for</em>, Christian believers have, through the ages, tried to articulate the faith they hold in many different ways. There have been three approaches that have emerged as “most common” among atonement theories as people of faith have developed them in conversation with Scripture. Christ is viewed as: (1) the One who died so we can be free to live and serve (e.g., Rom 8:3-4; Rev 1:5-6), (2) the One who goes ahead of us to teach us and represent us (e.g., Matt 28:7; Heb 12:1-2), and (3) the One who empowers us on the journey itself (e.g., Phil 4:13; 2 Cor 12:9). Theologians such as Calvin, Wesley, and Barth have tried to take all three of these into account in considering Jesus Christ’s atoning work, often <a id="page_188" class="calibre7"></a>identifying him, in relation to each of these three, respectively, as “priest, prophet, and king.”<a id="rch6en42" class="calibre7"></a><sup class="calibre12"><a href="notes.xhtml#ch6en42" class="calibre5">42</a></sup></p>
<h4 class="h3"><em class="calibre13">Christ as Priest: Anselmian Atonement</em></h4>
<p class="indent">In his book <em class="calibre8">Cur Deus Homo</em> (1098), Anselm of Canterbury explains why it is that God became a human being in Jesus Christ.<a id="rch6en43" class="calibre7"></a><sup class="calibre12"><a href="notes.xhtml#ch6en43" class="calibre5">43</a></sup> According to Anselm, our sinfulness dishonored God. The God who is perfectly righteous and holy cannot look upon sin because to do so would be inconsistent with God’s righteous character. But the holy God is also a God of order who desires to restore the damage done by sin. Because of who God is, then, God can only turn away from sinners, and God will find a way to be reconciled to them. In order for God to enter back into relationship with us, Anselm explains, the debt to God’s honor has to be “satisfied.” Since we, as sinners, are not capable of satisfying God’s honor, and since a human being has to pay the debt accrued as a consequence of human sin, God becomes incarnate in Jesus Christ. Because Jesus takes the penalty of dishonor upon himself, as the fully human, sinless one, God’s honor is restored. Jesus is offered a reward for his sacrifice, a sacrifice he was not compelled to make, being sinless. But because Jesus is also fully divine, he does not need the reward. He offers the reward to us. The reward is our salvation.</p>
<p class="indent">It is interesting to note that Anselm’s understanding, now most commonly known as <em class="calibre8">substitutionary atonement</em>, did not emerge until the end of the eleventh century. It is informative to ponder how those who hold faith were thinking about the role of the cross in redemption before that time. What seems to be the case is that, earlier in the church’s history, it was clearer to believers that God’s entrance into human existence was itself redemptive. Recall, along these lines, Gregory of Nazianzus’s assertion that what has not been assumed has not been saved, which takes as its corollary that what <em class="calibre8">has</em> been assumed <em class="calibre8">is</em> saved. Notice that Gregory–and all those from the fourth through the eleventh centuries who appreciated his insight–understood salvation to have been accomplished by way of the Word become flesh (which includes, but is not limited to, the cross).</p>
<p class="indent"><a id="page_189" class="calibre7"></a>Our thinking has changed since the time of Anselm. Today, we tend to look at the incarnation of God in Jesus Christ at Christmastime as a kind of means to an end. After all, Jesus had to get down here somehow, so he could grow up, die on the cross, and save us—right? I remember, as a child, sitting in the back of the church and hearing the preacher say that “Jesus died for me.” I remember wondering: How did Jesus’s death on the cross, so long ago, get from him to me? How did his dying help matters any? These are the kinds of on-the-ground questions Anselm was, to his credit, attempting to answer.</p>
<p class="indent">Anselm’s theory does a fine job of upholding the divine sovereignty. According to Anselm, God does not demand that the Son die because there is any external metaphysical necessity imposed on the being of God. The need for satisfaction stems from the <em class="calibre8">divine aseity</em> or the divine freedom, Anselm held. In other words: God becomes flesh because God’s very being demands it in order to be in relationship with us, not because God is following rules that compel God to do this. As David Bentley Hart explains it, Anselmian atonement does not represent Christ’s sacrifice as required by the “laws of the universe.” Rather, the sacrifice of Christ “belongs . . . to the infinite motion of God’s love, in which justice and mercy are one and can never be divided one from the other.”<a id="rch6en44" class="calibre7"></a><sup class="calibre12"><a href="notes.xhtml#ch6en44" class="calibre5">44</a></sup> The payment for our sins, then, is not made to the devil, which would imply that the devil had some power in the workings of the universe. Satisfaction is made to the one true God, for whom there is no rival.</p>
<p class="indent">Another strength of Anselmian atonement, not often noted, is that it takes very seriously God’s relationship to the created order, particularly to human beings. The closeness of God to us is seen not only in God’s decision to enter into our reality in Jesus Christ, making amends for our sinfulness. It is also seen in the fact that God is affected by us—so profoundly affected that God has to turn away; so affected that something has to be done to preserve God’s character.</p>
<p class="indent">As has already been suggested, there are many weaknesses to the Anselmian view. Both in the theological guild and also in many church pews it is coming under severe attack. People of faith are asking serious questions about whether it does more harm than good, when it comes to <a id="page_190" class="calibre7"></a>understanding who we are in relation to the God who meets and makes us. Does it actually heal our feelings of estrangement, we might ask, or does it serve only to deepen them? Many are concerned that this model glorifies human suffering and so promotes both shame and the sin of self-deprecation. If the Father-God sends the Son to die a violent death in order to satisfy the Father-God’s honor, they ask, how can we not see this as abusive?<a id="rch6en45" class="calibre7"></a><sup class="calibre12"><a href="notes.xhtml#ch6en45" class="calibre5">45</a></sup> Connected with this is frustration regarding Anselm’s insistence that God’s honor has been violated, as if God would be more willing to sacrifice God’s only child than to sacrifice God’s honor. And why, many people of faith want to know, couldn’t God just forgive human beings, without demanding a sacrifice at all?</p>
<p class="indent">This is a question that, as we have mentioned, was raised as far back as the twelfth century by Peter Abélard (ca. 1130). Abélard wrote that he did not even recognize Anselm’s God as the God he loved and worshipped. He, like feminist thinkers who would follow, thought Anselm also engaged in faulty logic, asking: “If the sin of Adam was so great that it could be expiated only by the death of Christ, what expiation will avail for the act of murder committed against Christ, and for the many great crimes committed against him or his followers? How did the death of his innocent Son so please God the Father that through it he should be reconciled to us?”<a id="rch6en46" class="calibre7"></a><sup class="calibre12"><a href="notes.xhtml#ch6en46" class="calibre5">46</a></sup></p>
<p class="indent">For Abélard as well as for many who hold faith today, the idea that God would require death in order to forgive is antithetical to what we confess about God’s unconditional love and graceful, ongoing creation. In fact, I also reject this proposition. I do not believe the Father required the death of the Son.<a id="rch6en47" class="calibre7"></a><sup class="calibre12"><a href="notes.xhtml#ch6en47" class="calibre5">47</a></sup> I am in good company. While Calvin emphasized Anselmian atonement (the priestly office of Christ) more than the other two approaches, he, too, seemed to struggle with how to reconcile God’s “wrath” with God’s loving character:</p>
<p class="blockquotet">Since our hearts cannot, in God’s mercy, either seize upon life ardently enough or accept it with the gratefulness we owe, unless our minds are first struck and overwhelmed by fear of God’s wrath and by dread of eternal death, we are taught by Scripture to perceive that apart from Christ, God is, so to speak, hostile to us, and his hand is armed for our destruction; to embrace his benevolence and fatherly love in Christ alone.<a id="rch6en48" class="calibre7"></a><sup class="calibre12"><a href="notes.xhtml#ch6en48" class="calibre5">48</a></sup></p>
<p class="noindentt"><a id="page_191" class="calibre7"></a>Clearly, there are troubling themes in this particular citation from Calvin. Significant, however, is his desire to convince us that the wrath of God is not really part of the divine character, but a pedagogical tactic for the sake of our salvation.</p>
<p class="indent">One further, and important, critique of Anselm is that he tends to reduce Jesus Christ’s atoning work to the substitutionary work on the cross. According to feminist theologian Dorothee Sölle,<a id="rch6en49" class="calibre7"></a><sup class="calibre12"><a href="notes.xhtml#ch6en49" class="calibre5">49</a></sup> this raises certain questions: If Christ is only our <em class="calibre8">substitute</em>, what happens to us? Was Christ’s only purpose in becoming human to die as the penalty for our sin? Did the incarnation, the teachings, the life of Jesus Christ contribute nothing to our salvation? If Christ is only the One who substitutes for us, and not One who lives for us and enters into partnership with us, Sölle holds, the atoning work of Christ is not accomplished for our benefit, but only in order to replace us. And replacement, she thinks, is not salvation, but annihilation.</p>
<h4 class="h3"><em class="calibre13">Christ as Prophet: Abélardian Atonement</em></h4>
<p class="indent">Having critiqued Anselm’s understanding of atonement, Abélard was fair enough to present his own view, commonly known as the <em class="calibre8">moral exemplar theory</em> or, sometimes, <em class="calibre8">representational theory</em>. According to Abélard, we are not saved primarily through Christ’s death on the cross, but through the example of Christ’s life, which includes his suffering and death on the cross. Abélard thought the Gospel testimony presented such a compelling portrait of Jesus Christ—his love for God, his submission to the Father’s will, his concern for those to whom he ministered, his desire to live a righteous life—that we who ponder these stories will be compelled to respond in kind. In contrast to what he believed was a skewed representation of God by Anselm, Abélard founded his understanding of atonement on his belief that God is a God of love, and that the example of this love is Jesus Christ. The cross, too, is primarily a manifestation of the divine love, the perfect realization of the divine friendship with us: “By the faith which we hold concerning Christ, love is increased in us, by virtue of the conviction that God in Christ has united our human nature to himself and, by <a id="page_192" class="calibre7"></a>suffering the same nature, has demonstrated to us that perfection of love of which he himself says: ‘Greater love than this no man hath. . . .’”<a id="rch6en50" class="calibre7"></a><sup class="calibre12"><a href="notes.xhtml#ch6en50" class="calibre5">50</a></sup></p>
<p class="indent">For Abélard, Jesus Christ is not just a nice example, a leader in a game of Simon Says whom we are called to emulate. For Abélard, Christ is the one who constrains us to love: the best friend, the parent, the mentor—the person who will not let us go, the advocate who is always working to make a place for us to be who we are. The desire to emulate Christ above all else, he thought, is a mark of spiritual maturity.</p>
<p class="indent">Abélard’s understanding is helpful insofar as it does not reduce the person and work of Jesus Christ to the event of the cross, but understands the atoning work of the cross to be efficacious only in the context of Jesus Christ’s entire life and ministry. In this regard, Abélard’s understanding of the atonement returns to the early church’s emphasis on the saving value of the incarnation. God in Jesus Christ has entered into existence with us, and in so doing has redeemed us. We are not replaced, as in the case of a solely substitutionary view. Instead, our place is held by Christ.</p>
<p class="indent">Abélard opens the door, then, for us to consider what Jesus’s teachings and interactions with others in his ministry communicate to us about our salvation. Given Christ’s prophetic example, how shall we then live in relationship to God and one another? Following Abélard, looking to Christ as our representative might lead us away from seeking to locate the cross in the story of the Samaritan woman at the well or that of the prodigal son.<a id="rch6en51" class="calibre7"></a><sup class="calibre12"><a href="notes.xhtml#ch6en51" class="calibre5">51</a></sup> Instead, we note that Jesus’s concern for the woman compels her to respond to him and to reach out to others; the father’s overwhelming love urges the elder son to give up thinking only about what is fair and instead participate in the realm of grace. When seen through an Abélardian lens, salvation in both of these stories is holistic—revealing to us what it is to live in the Kingdom of God in the here and now.</p>
<p class="indent">Similarly, an Abélardian reading would not attempt to make sense of Jesus’s cry of dereliction<a id="rch6en52" class="calibre7"></a><sup class="calibre12"><a href="notes.xhtml#ch6en52" class="calibre5">52</a></sup> by understanding it as a necessary means to the end of paying the penalty for our sin. Instead, a representational reading helps us to hear the cry as an affirmation that God really suffers with us, and so understands our suffering. God loves us enough to meet us in the most heinous dimensions of estranged human existence with us, and this <a id="page_193" class="calibre7"></a>identification with us is itself redemptive, apart from anything Christ then does or doesn’t do for us.</p>
<p class="indent">The idea that we need to consider Christ’s atoning work on the cross in relation to the incarnation, the rest of his life, and the resurrection/ascension was emphasized in the Reformation period and is still a strong theme in Reformed theology today. Calvin asks: How has Christ abolished sin, banished the separation between us and God, and acquired righteousness to render God favorable and kindly toward us? He doesn’t answer this question with “by dying on the cross” but “by the whole course of his obedience.”<a id="rch6en53" class="calibre7"></a><sup class="calibre12"><a href="notes.xhtml#ch6en53" class="calibre5">53</a></sup></p>
<p class="indent">In a context in which we are suspicious of those who claim to be our representatives (consider, for example, our attitude toward our political and legal representatives), it might be difficult to resonate with Abélard’s depiction of Christ as our Representative. Abélard’s greatest contribution to us might then be that he communicates so clearly what it is to be represented and to represent. Surely, because Christ our Representative is for us, living with awareness of our salvation must entail that we be for one another as well as do for one another.</p>
<p class="indent">The critique frequently made of Abélard is twofold: First, those who have learned from Anselm’s view are concerned that Abélard does not take into adequate account the character of God. To argue that God may simply forgive if God wants to is to ignore God’s self-revelation as the perfectly holy One. God does not do whatever God wants to, but only that which is consistent with God’s own character as holy and righteous.</p>
<p class="indent">Second, some critics wonder if Abélard has given much thought to the depraved character of human beings. How can he be so sure that we are equipped to respond to the love demonstrated for us by Jesus Christ? Someone who is simply “a good example” cannot redeem us, they argue, for our salvation then ultimately rests on our capacity to mold ourselves in to Jesus’s likeness, and we are not capable of doing this in and of ourselves. Human beings need more help than this, critics argue.</p>
<p class="indent">One further critique made of Abélardian atonement is that it, like Anselmian atonement, can perpetuate violence and abuse. This is because the cross is still interpreted as a demonstration of love, by way of self-sacrifice. <a id="page_194" class="calibre7"></a>Resisting this, many feminist and liberation theologians argue that the model of conformity to Christ for marginalized persons can no longer be one of self-sacrifice. The marginalized need, rather, to learn that they are God’s precious children and to stand up for themselves. They need to look, perhaps, not to emulate Christ’s work on the cross, but to respond to the command of the risen Christ to follow him to Galilee.<a id="rch6en54" class="calibre7"></a><sup class="calibre12"><a href="notes.xhtml#ch6en54" class="calibre5">54</a></sup></p>
<h4 class="h3"><em class="calibre13">Christ as Victor:</em> Christus Victor</h4>
<p class="indent">The <em class="calibre8">christus victor</em> theory cannot be ascribed to any single thinker as readily as the Anselmian and Abélardian views. Often Irenaeus (2nd c.) is credited with its earliest articulation, and the theory is later reflected in theologians including Luther (16th c.) and Wesley (19th c.). It has been promoted most recently by twentieth-century theologians Gustaf Aulén<a id="rch6en55" class="calibre7"></a><sup class="calibre12"><a href="notes.xhtml#ch6en55" class="calibre5">55</a></sup> and C. S. Lewis.<a id="rch6en56" class="calibre7"></a><sup class="calibre12"><a href="notes.xhtml#ch6en56" class="calibre5">56</a></sup></p>
<p class="indent">According to the <em class="calibre8">christus victor</em> theory, God and the forces of Satan are in battle with one another. There is no question of who will ultimately win, <em class="calibre8">christus victor</em> proponents argue, and in this sense the battle is therefore not a real battle. There is no God above God, Irenaeus insists, which is why Christ was able to “overthrow Satan by means of [God’s] words and commandments.”<a id="rch6en57" class="calibre7"></a><sup class="calibre12"><a href="notes.xhtml#ch6en57" class="calibre5">57</a></sup> Nonetheless, <em class="calibre8">christus victor</em> clearly acknowledges that, while never tenable rivals to God, Satan and Satan’s demons have real power along the way to the coming of the Kingdom. “Jesus opposes [the forces of evil] during his life, is apparently conquered by them in his death, but triumphs over them through his resurrection.”<a id="rch6en58" class="calibre7"></a><sup class="calibre12"><a href="notes.xhtml#ch6en58" class="calibre5">58</a></sup></p>
<p class="indent">God and Satan are at war because human beings sinned. In sinning, we succumbed to the power of Satan (the “fallen one”). Christ came to release us from the bonds of Satan, and to bind Satan to sin. As Irenaeus explains:</p>
<p class="blockquotet">For as in the beginning Satan enticed human beings to transgress their Maker’s law, and thereby got them into his power; yet Satan’s power consists in transgression and apostasy, and with these Satan bound humanity . . . so it was necessary that through a human being Satan himself should, when conquered, be bound with the same chains with which he had bound humanity.<a id="rch6en59" class="calibre7"></a><sup class="calibre12"><a href="notes.xhtml#ch6en59" class="calibre5">59</a></sup></p>
<p class="noindentt"><a id="page_195" class="calibre7"></a>According to Irenaeus, Christ “carried off a glorious and perfect victory” by paying the ransom that was owed to Satan for our salvation.<a id="rch6en60" class="calibre7"></a><sup class="calibre12"><a href="notes.xhtml#ch6en60" class="calibre5">60</a></sup></p>
<p class="indent">The <em class="calibre8">christus victor</em> theory presumes that we continue to struggle against demonic forces even though victory has been achieved in Christ. Luther believed that Satan has no real power over us, in the sense that we could ever be “kidnapped” from the grace of God. But he thought it was spiritually beneficial that we be continuously reminded of this. Luther thought, for example, that remembering our baptisms would help guard us against the wiles of Satan, enabling us to live in conscious awareness of God’s grace. Consider, for example, the third verse of “A Mighty Fortress Is Our God”:<a id="rch6en61" class="calibre7"></a><sup class="calibre12"><a href="notes.xhtml#ch6en61" class="calibre5">61</a></sup></p>
<p class="poemt">And though this world with devils filled,</p>
<p class="poem">Should threaten to undo us,</p>
<p class="poem">We will not fear, for God hath willed</p>
<p class="poem">His truth to triumph through us.</p>
<p class="poem">The prince of darkness grim, We tremble not for him;</p>
<p class="poem">His rage we can endure, For lo! his doom is sure,</p>
<p class="poem">One little word shall fell him.</p>
<p class="noindentt">Clearly, Irenaeus and Luther found it to be spiritually valuable to name their experience of the principalities and powers in their midst, testifying always to the superior power of God.</p>
<p class="indent">A frequently noted strength of the <em class="calibre8">christus victor</em> theory of atonement is that it is honest about naming the presence of evil in the world for what it is, being clear that it is not something that will simply <em class="calibre8">go away</em> without intervention. For this reason, liberation theologians often resonate with it, emphasizing that the work of atonement is “ongoing.”<a id="rch6en62" class="calibre7"></a><sup class="calibre12"><a href="notes.xhtml#ch6en62" class="calibre5">62</a></sup> The <em class="calibre8">christus victor</em> theory is reflected, for example, in Peruvian theologian Gustavo Gutiérrez’s comment:</p>
<p class="blockquotet">Redemption implies a direct relation to sin, and sin—the breach of friendship with God and others—is a human, social, and historical reality which originates in a socially and historically situated freedom. . . . Sin demands a radical liberation, which in turn necessarily implies a political liberation.<a id="rch6en63" class="calibre7"></a><sup class="calibre12"><a href="notes.xhtml#ch6en63" class="calibre5">63</a></sup></p>
<p class="noindentt"><a id="page_196" class="calibre7"></a>A strength of <em class="calibre8">christus victor</em> is that, in unabashedly naming sin, it can support dynamics of change. Transformation can only occur if sin and/or oppression is identified; once we identify it, we can repent of it, disarm it, and work to put in place personal and institutional structures that are consistent with the salvation we claim.</p>
<p class="indent">In many mainline Christian denominations in North America, there is not much emphasis on <em class="calibre8">christus victor</em>. There are at least three reasons for this. First, <em class="calibre8">christus victor</em> is often thought to compromise, however unintentionally, on God’s sovereignty: If Satan has power that needs to be undermined, and God must act in order to thwart the will of Satan, then God is not all-powerful, but only mostly powerful. To hold that Satan must be attended to is, finally, to reveal that one believes in more than one god, even if Satan is only a lesser power.</p>
<p class="indent">Second, as Aulén explains, the benefits of <em class="calibre8">christus victor</em> have not been seriously considered in the modern period because we understand this theory of atonement to be too “dramatic” for conservative theological thinkers who thought it did not reflect a “clearly worked-out theological scheme” and was therefore unhelpful. For liberal theologians, Aulén argues, <em class="calibre8">christus victor</em> was too “mythological,” “grotesque,” and “lurid,” unable to address, concretely, the realities of life.<a id="rch6en64" class="calibre7"></a><sup class="calibre12"><a href="notes.xhtml#ch6en64" class="calibre5">64</a></sup></p>
<p class="indent">Third, there is the concern that <em class="calibre8">christus victor</em> is too triumphalistic. To insist that Christ conquers sin and evil can be to deny the reality of sin and pain. The victory of Christ and his followers has too often in history come at the expense of others, as in the case of the Crusades. The victory of Christ and his followers is meaningless and oppressive in the face of heinous crimes such as have occurred, for instance, at Auschwitz, during the Inquisition, in Bosnia, and in Rwanda. To sing “Onward Christian Soldiers”<a id="rch6en65" class="calibre7"></a><sup class="calibre12"><a href="notes.xhtml#ch6en65" class="calibre5">65</a></sup> is not, according to this concern, to live our salvation in Christ. It is to use our identification with Christ as a weapon against others.</p>
<p class="indent">While liberation theologians often understand <em class="calibre8">christus victor</em> to open up the possibility for speaking and acting prophetically against injustice in the hands of the oppressed, they are concerned that it supports imperialism in the hands of the oppressor. For those who are looking for a way out of working to bring God’s Kingdom on earth as it is in heaven, <em class="calibre8">christus <a id="page_197" class="calibre7"></a>victor</em> can serve as a justification for passivity. This is because, though the threat of Satan is real, the victory of God is still a foregone conclusion. If it is inevitable that God wins in the end, one might reason, why even fight?</p>
<h3 class="h2">E<small class="calibre3">XPANSIVE</small> S<small class="calibre3">ALVATION</small></h3>
<p class="indent">How does consideration of these various approaches help us better articulate what it means to be saved, if salvation means living into the abundant life offered to us by Christ? It might be tempting, at this point, to choose our favorite of the three, arguing for why, all things considered, it is the best approach. But I have suggested that we resist the urge to reduce our understanding of atonement to any one theory, believing, as Leanne Van Dyk puts it, that a “range of theories attempts to focus our attention, illuminate the truth, and point beyond themselves to God.”<a id="rch6en66" class="calibre7"></a><sup class="calibre12"><a href="notes.xhtml#ch6en66" class="calibre5">66</a></sup> As the portrayals of Jesus vary in the four Gospels, each shedding fresh insight on the figure of Jesus Christ, so the various approaches to understanding the atonement challenge us not to become overly confident in our ability to summarize what God has done for us in Jesus Christ. Instead, keeping the three in play can open us to marveling ever-anew at the working of grace, drawing us into deeper participation in the mystery of our salvation.</p>
<p class="indent">Thinking of these approaches to atonement in an integrated fashion, then, should not be done in the spirit of trying to harmonize them into a master narrative. Rather, setting them side by side enables us to see what each contributes, and what they all together contribute, to our understanding of our relationship to God.</p>
<p class="indent">What all these theories have in common is, of course, that they attempt to elucidate how our salvation is accomplished by way of the life and work of the fully human, fully divine One, Jesus Christ. The starting point of each theory is “The Word became flesh.” While Anselm, Abélard, and Irenaeus disagree with how, exactly, the coming of the God-Human saves us, they are in perfect agreement that what God did for us in the work of atonement must also involve a remembering and recognizing of <a id="page_198" class="calibre7"></a>who God is for us in Jesus Christ. As George Hunsinger notes, citing Thomas Torrance, “It is all one indivisible act . . . in one indivisible Person. . . . The atonement is identical with Christ himself. . . . It lives forever in the person of the Mediator. He is the Atonement.”<a id="rch6en67" class="calibre7"></a><sup class="calibre12"><a href="notes.xhtml#ch6en67" class="calibre5">67</a></sup> When we understand this, we can begin to look at these approaches to the atonement not only as explanations of what God did, but who God is; not only as clues to what we receive, but who we are in relationship to God. The full benefits of grace that are ours in and through the atoning work of Christ are not handed out to us from the windows of the divine being. Rather, through the work of the One who is with us and for us as the Word made flesh, our salvation is our being drawn into the depths of the one who is triune. Atonement theory, understood as grounded in the person of Jesus Christ and communicated by the Holy Spirit, enables us to glimpse the <em class="calibre8">how</em> of the reality that we abide in Christ, and he in us.<a id="rch6en68" class="calibre7"></a><sup class="calibre12"><a href="notes.xhtml#ch6en68" class="calibre5">68</a></sup> Our lives are, indeed, “hidden with Christ in God”<a id="rch6en69" class="calibre7"></a><sup class="calibre12"><a href="notes.xhtml#ch6en69" class="calibre5">69</a></sup> precisely because in Christ, God has acted. These atoning acts of Christ, utterly consistent with the being of the One who loves in freedom,<a id="rch6en70" class="calibre7"></a><sup class="calibre12"><a href="notes.xhtml#ch6en70" class="calibre5">70</a></sup> reveal to us that we, through Christ, by the power of the Spirit, participate in the very life of God.</p>
<p class="indent">“I don’t call you servants any longer, because servants don’t know what their master is doing,” Jesus says. “Instead, I call you friends, because everything I heard from my Father I have made known to you.”<a id="rch6en71" class="calibre7"></a><sup class="calibre12"><a href="notes.xhtml#ch6en71" class="calibre5">71</a></sup> The mystery of God’s will is revealed to us in the atonement, in the person of Jesus Christ who encounters us by revealing who God is in his actions on our behalf. In him, the Word made flesh, we as flesh live and move and have our being. Because he is one with the Father, we are one with God. Salvation is living in this synchronicity, in this mutual abiding. It is not in claiming the gift that God is handing us—via Christ’s death on our behalf—apart from living with Christ, who has entered into death and life with us. It is not in claiming that Jesus is the Messiah, the Son of the living God, and thinking that we know what this means apart from knowing him. And knowing him, again, is knowing his atoning work: the work that reveals who he is because he—as the God who is one of us—always acts in a way consistent with the divine being, bringing us along.</p>
<p class="indent"><a id="page_199" class="calibre7"></a>This abiding in Christ and he in us is known in our baptisms—in him we die to sin, are buried, and rise to new life. Apart from our union with Jesus Christ, apart from his entry into human reality with us, atonement theory is meaningless. To understand Jesus Christ as “doing something for us” in the work of atonement is to overlook our salvation; to thank God for coming and dying for us without recognizing that God drew all creaturely existence—in its dismal as well as lively colors—into God’s life is to miss that the abundant life <em class="calibre8">is</em> our salvation.</p>
<p class="indent">The three approaches to atonement theory, in short, reveal to us who God is in relation to us, and who we are in relation to God. In Jesus Christ, we learn that God is for us through what God does for us in the free exercise of God’s love. When understood in the context of the incarnational event, both the concern that human beings are replaced by Jesus Christ (critique of Anselm) and the concern that we replace Christ (critique of Abélard) is appeased. Our salvation, realized in and through the incarnate One, is accomplished not only by way of our replacement by Christ, not only by way of representation by Christ, and not only by way of our empowerment by Christ. As a parent’s embracing love for a child is manifest in the various roles a parent takes on in relationship to that child (disciplinarian, model, coach, for example), so God in Jesus Christ enters into our reality and exalts us to the very life of the triune God, saving us in a multiplicity of ways.</p>
<p class="indent">In his substitutionary role, Christ reveals that God is for us by taking on the burdens that we cannot handle. He does this precisely in order to save us, to free us to engage in “other more important and more happy and more fruitful activities” than being caught up in our own guiltiness.<a id="rch6en72" class="calibre7"></a><sup class="calibre12"><a href="notes.xhtml#ch6en72" class="calibre5">72</a></sup> Christ’s representative work communicates that we do not live out our salvation as lone rangers, but as members of Christ’s body<a id="rch6en73" class="calibre7"></a><sup class="calibre12"><a href="notes.xhtml#ch6en73" class="calibre5">73</a></sup> who look to the Author and Perfector of our faith, the One who has gone ahead of us and prepared a way. Practically speaking, to work out our salvation<a id="rch6en74" class="calibre7"></a><sup class="calibre12"><a href="notes.xhtml#ch6en74" class="calibre5">74</a></sup> is to pray constantly in the name of the One who has gone before, the One who understands, the One who is never without us, for he has gone into all places, even into Hell. And <em class="calibre8">christus victor</em> reminds us that to be redeemed means that God has promised to give us strength for the journey. While <a id="page_200" class="calibre7"></a><em class="calibre8">christus victor</em> has been used to support imperialism, in the life of the saved it must function as a constant critique. As we work our way along the path cleared for us by the Pioneer, <em class="calibre8">christus victor</em> reminds us that we are not the victors, for Christ is.</p>
<p class="indent">Understanding Christ to be <em class="calibre8">for</em> us in the event of the cross cannot remove from it the pain and the violence. The concern of Abélard, feminist theologians, and others that atonement theories promote violence can, however, be more adequately addressed when the three approaches to atonement are held in play. Substitutionary atonement, when seen in relationship to the representational view, argues that we are replaced on the cross precisely so that we can have a place in running the race that is before us.<a id="rch6en75" class="calibre7"></a><sup class="calibre12"><a href="notes.xhtml#ch6en75" class="calibre5">75</a></sup> When seen in relation to <em class="calibre8">christus victor</em>, substitutionary atonement becomes a prophetic claim that God died on that cross in our place so that we do <em class="calibre8">not</em> have to die for our sins or the sins of others. Christ is the victor who dies; we are the disciples who can therefore offer ourselves as <em class="calibre8">living</em> sacrifices.<a id="rch6en76" class="calibre7"></a><sup class="calibre12"><a href="notes.xhtml#ch6en76" class="calibre5">76</a></sup> To direct a victim to suffer as Christ suffered is to deny our salvation and separate the cross from the incarnation and the resurrection, to see the crucifixion as “something God did” that must be done over and over again because it takes place only in time. On the contrary, the cross is once and for all because it is eternally realized (in the priestly role of Christ) and conquered (in the kingly role of Christ) in the life of the triune God.</p>
<p class="indent">Salvation, as the recognition of our redemption, then means this: in relation to our sinfulness, we are replaced; in relation to the course we are called to follow, we are represented; and in relation to the nitty gritty details of the journey itself, we are sustained. Salvation is neither something that is completed (only justification), something to be waited for (only glorification), or something that is in progress (only sanctification). Salvation is not even all of these three, though all three are included. Rather, salvation is living in and with the One who accomplishes it for us and with us, the One who continuously meets us and makes us by way of his life, death, and resurrection.</p>
<p class="indent">In the next chapters we turn to what it looks like to live as those who know their salvation in Christ and are consciously claiming the presence <a id="page_201" class="calibre7"></a>and guidance of the Holy Spirit, in the context of the community of faith, to guide them in their spiritual growth, their work, their relationships, and their life-shaping decisions. The God who has met us in creation and incarnation not only continues to make us anew, but promises to bless us all along the way, even as we struggle to interpret and negotiate the many ambiguities that characterize our world. How do we “hold faith,” in the real world of our daily lives, as those who remember, together, the reality of our salvation?</p>
</body>
</html>
