<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>Holding Faith</title>
    <meta content="urn:uuid:e0000000-0000-0000-0000-000004415877" name="Adept.expected.resource"/>
    <meta http-equiv="Content-Type" content="text/html; charset=utf-8"/>
  <link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="../../stylesheet.css"/>
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="../../page_styles.css"/>
</head>
  <body class="calibre">
<h2 class="h1"><a id="page_106" class="calibre5"></a><a id="page_107" class="calibre5"></a><a id="ch4" class="calibre5"></a>Chapter Four</h2>
<h2 class="h2a">I<small class="calibre11">N</small> W<small class="calibre11">HAT</small> W<small class="calibre11">AYS</small> D<small class="calibre11">OES</small> G<small class="calibre11">OD</small> C<small class="calibre11">LAIM</small> U<small class="calibre11">S</small>?</h2>
<h3 class="h3x"><a id="ch4lev1" class="calibre5"></a><em class="calibre13">The Doctrine of the Trinity</em></h3>
<p class="noindent">In the last chapter we considered the truth that lies at the center of our faith: God has met us in the person of Jesus Christ. By way of the Word made flesh God is with us, and in him we are included, we have said, in the very life of God. In the person of Jesus Christ, Christians believe, God not only meets us but also makes us God’s own. We are claimed as beloved ones embraced by a lover, as children held by parents, as friends defended and believed in by one another. We are claimed as objects of a love greater than our understanding, a love that desires we participate, as conscious subjects, in the joy of its benefits. As Jesus asks Peter, so we, too, are asked, by God: “Do you love me?”<a id="rch4en1" class="calibre7"></a><sup class="calibre12"><a href="notes.xhtml#ch4en1" class="calibre5">1</a></sup> From a trinitarian vantage point, we might recognize this question as implicit in creation, if we understand God’s creation of us, and the whole world, as an act of love. And we might understand it to extend from our response to Jesus’s question out and into the shape of our lives, where we are driven by the Spirit to feed and to tend.</p>
<p class="indent">The God who meets us in Jesus Christ claims us, but the claim God makes on us is not something new or alien to God. As we will discuss in the chapter on salvation, God meets us in Jesus Christ, to be sure, in order to heal us. What is healed in Christ is not God’s love for us, however, but <a id="page_108" class="calibre7"></a>rather our faulty perception of it. God’s love, Christian traditions have consistently taught, is steadfast and unconditional. Even when we think we have been left behind, who God is argues to the contrary. When Jesus meets us, we are reminded of the claim God has always and consistently made on us. We are God’s creatures; we are God’s children; we are God’s ambassadors. God desires fellowship with us; God wants to shower us with blessings; God calls us to participate in the ministry of reconciliation.</p>
<p class="indent">The claim made on us is multifaceted because the one God meets us in multiple ways. Traditionally, Christians have reflected on this by way of the doctrine of the Trinity, which holds that God acts, on our behalf, as Father, as Son, and as Holy Spirit. In this chapter we will continue exploring how it is that God meets us and claims us, not only in the person of Jesus Christ but also as Father and Holy Spirit.</p>
<h3 class="h2">A N<small class="calibre3">OTE ABOUT</small> T<small class="calibre3">RINITARIAN</small> G<small class="calibre3">OD</small> L<small class="calibre3">ANGUAGE</small></h3>
<p class="indent">A couple of comments about language, before moving on, to address one of the pressing questions of our day. Like it or not, we live in an era where there is much disagreement about God language. Debates about how to speak about God come into play especially strongly when we discuss God as Trinity, because the traditional language is, decidedly, male. But what, if anything, can and should we do about this? Even if we agree with the way Sandra Schneiders once humorously put it—that “God Is More Than Two Men and a Bird”<a id="rch4en2" class="calibre7"></a><sup class="calibre12"><a href="notes.xhtml#ch4en2" class="calibre5">2</a></sup>—it is nonetheless the case that male language for God is the most commonly used language of the traditions we have inherited. It has, in one way or another, shaped our experience of the faith that holds us.</p>
<p class="indent">I tend to use, in this chapter, the traditional apostolic language that God is “Father, Son, and Holy Spirit.” I use this language because it is the language that connects Christian believers through the last two thousand years. It is the language of the Apostles’ Creed—a Creed developed in the second century of the church’s history, to be used in tandem with baptismal services: “Do you believe in God the Father? Do you believe in God <a id="page_109" class="calibre7"></a>the Son? Do you believe in God the Holy Spirit?” baptismal candidates were asked.<a id="rch4en3" class="calibre7"></a><sup class="calibre12"><a href="notes.xhtml#ch4en3" class="calibre5">3</a></sup> Since then and still today, children and adults are baptized in the name of the “Father, Son, and Holy Spirit.” While there is nothing magical about any language we use for God, many Christians find it to be a very powerful experience to use the trinitarian formula that was used by the earliest Christians and down through the ages. Christians baptize in the name of the “Father, Son, and Holy Spirit,” for example, in order to remember we are members of the one household of the same triune God, together with those who have been baptized for the last two thousand years. Church congregations generally recite the Apostles’ Creed, which again is built on this apostolic formula, whenever the Lord’s Supper is celebrated; this reminds Christians they are joined across both time and space—through history and all around the globe—to all other Christians who use the same Creed.</p>
<p class="indent">My intention in using the apostolic formula is, then, to be inclusive of all Christians everywhere. But I don’t think good intention is enough to justify use of “Father, Son, and Holy Spirit” without acknowledging and attending to the fact that this language has been too often used either to exclude, or to establish hierarchies that privilege some over others. Most notably, the language of “Father, Son, and Holy Spirit” has been used to justify the superordination of men and the subordination of women,<a id="rch4en4" class="calibre7"></a><sup class="calibre12"><a href="notes.xhtml#ch4en4" class="calibre5">4</a></sup> the idea that men are the “leaders and initiators” and women are the “responders and followers.”<a id="rch4en5" class="calibre7"></a><sup class="calibre12"><a href="notes.xhtml#ch4en5" class="calibre5">5</a></sup> It is likely no secret to anyone reading this book that Christian believers do not always agree about whether and how to address this problem. Some simply hold it should be enough to recognize that the use of “Father, Son, and Holy Spirit” is in no way meant to imply that God is male. Others think the roots of the issue run deeper, and that the problem of privileging men over women cannot be corrected simply by asserting that, in the case of God, the reference to “Father” is gender-neutral. As we have learned in numerous sociological, psychological, and linguistic studies, language is powerful, shaping the way we think as well as reflecting <em class="calibre8">what</em> we think.<a id="rch4en6" class="calibre7"></a><sup class="calibre12"><a href="notes.xhtml#ch4en6" class="calibre5">6</a></sup> Over the course of the centuries and even millennia, the almost sole use of male language for God has influenced <a id="page_110" class="calibre7"></a>how we understand God, and how we understand men and women to resemble and/or not resemble God.</p>
<p class="indent">My approach is to honor both the strengths of the tradition and the valid challenges made to the tradition. In the pages that follow, then, I will use the apostolic language of “Father, Son, and Holy Spirit,” but I will also try to model an expansive way of engaging this apostolic language. I am influenced, in this approach, by at least two sources. First, by the argument espoused by Elizabeth Johnson, that the best way to make sure Father language is not misunderstood is to use other language for God as well. When we use “equivalent female images” for God,<a id="rch4en7" class="calibre7"></a><sup class="calibre12"><a href="notes.xhtml#ch4en7" class="calibre5">7</a></sup> for example, we are reminded that who God is cannot be exhausted even by the very best titles we might use. On this point even Calvin agrees, explaining that “no figures of speech can describe God’s extraordinary affection towards us; for it is infinite and various.”<a id="rch4en8" class="calibre7"></a><sup class="calibre12"><a href="notes.xhtml#ch4en8" class="calibre5">8</a></sup> Calvin insists, further, that God “has manifested himself to be both . . . Father and Mother,” noting that God “did not satisfy himself with proposing the example of a father . . . but in order to express his very strong affection, he chose to liken himself to a mother, calling his people not merely ‘children,’ but the fruit of the womb, towards which there is usually a warmer affection.” Interesting that a twenty-first-century feminist theologian and a sixteenth-century Reformation theologian would make such similar arguments. Clearly, they are both remembering that all of our theological language—even our most beloved titles for God—is analogical in character.</p>
<p class="indent">I am also influenced by a church document I had the privilege of working on several years ago. It is titled <em class="calibre8">The Trinity: God’s Love Overflowing</em>.<a id="rch4en9" class="calibre7"></a><sup class="calibre12"><a href="notes.xhtml#ch4en9" class="calibre5">9</a></sup> After struggling not only for hours and days but even for a couple years about how to handle the matter of trinitarian God language, members of the committee who crafted this document agreed to recognize the language of “Father, Son, and Holy Spirit” as the anchor language of the church that cannot be replaced, but can be supplemented by language that helps clarify its meaning. Similar to Johnson and Calvin, <em class="calibre8">The Trinity: God’s Love Overflowing</em> commits to using expansive language for God because to do so is consistent with God’s very nature. But it recognizes at the same time that it is also true to who God is to be known in particular, concrete <a id="page_111" class="calibre7"></a>ways and relationships and not just in an endless number of ways that may seem good to us. Christian traditions have consistently identified knowing God with experiencing God’s acts as “Father,” “Son,” and “Spirit.”</p>
<p class="indent">“But wait!” we might say. “If God is infinite, why limit the ways we refer to God to only three?” In one sense, this is a good point. Who God is cannot be exhausted by even the best ways we have of speaking of God. God is more, even, than “the Word was made flesh”; more, even, than “Father, Son, and Holy Spirit.” The <em class="calibre8">oneness</em> of God’s triune character reminds us of the truth that no amount of knowing God can ever undo God’s hiddenness; that none of God’s acts—as true as they are to who God is—ever exhaust the divine being. But the <em class="calibre8">threeness</em>, with all of its specificity, reminds us of another truth equally descriptive of God, that is: God has entered into existence with us not only abstractly, as the one who in some sense gives us life, and loves us, and keeps us going through our lives. Rather, to say God is three is to remember that God has met us <em class="calibre8">concretely</em>, in the context of our own creaturely history. God the Father created us willfully and with desire. God the Son saved us by entering into a specific moment and person in time. God the Holy Spirit birthed the church, with all its various, specific peoples, languages, and gifts.</p>
<p class="indent">To think of the triune God in relation to the particular number three helps us remember that, if we thought of God as endlessly particular, we would lose track of the specificity and importance of the threeness itself. I remember when I first had the opportunity to think through this. I was part of a panel discussion on the Trinity in which someone presented a paper arguing that the problem with thinking about God in terms of Trinity is that three is not enough. The concern of the presenter, in many ways quite understandably, was that “three” is way too constraining of a way to think of the God who is all-in-all, the God who is infinite. But, I wondered, what <em class="calibre8">would</em> be enough of a number, when it comes to the infinite God? Would 5,834 be enough? How about 9,456,321,069? In the face of an infinite being, it seems to me there is no number that is enough, if enough means to in some way do justice to God and all God does. God is able “to accomplish more than we can ask or imagine”<a id="rch4en10" class="calibre7"></a><sup class="calibre12"><a href="notes.xhtml#ch4en10" class="calibre5">10</a></sup> . . . or count!</p>
<p class="indent"><a id="page_112" class="calibre7"></a>The irony is that, as soon as we think of the one God as present in an endless number of ways, we have forgotten the divine mystery. In other words, it makes sense that the God who is one, the God who is sovereign, the God who is all-in-all, the God who fills the very cosmos is present in more ways than can be counted, and certainly in more ways than are encapsulated in the “three” of the Trinity. What is truly mysterious (and this is what we are reminded of by the <em class="calibre8">three in one</em> and <em class="calibre8">one in three</em>) is that the God who is one, sovereign, all-in-all, and cosmos-filling is also three. Not 9,456,321,069. But three. Only three. There is an absurdity to this, to talking about the all-in-all God in such specific terms. A trinitarian thinker will say, in the face of such absurdity, “exactly.” As we peer over the manger at the baby Jesus and marvel that nothing that is exists apart from this one born of Mary, so we look at the concrete number <em class="calibre8">three</em> and engage the specific acts of God the Father, God the Son, and God the Holy Spirit. And we stand in wonder at the mystery that the God who is unmanageably and incomprehensibly <em class="calibre8">one</em> meets us, and claims us, in these awesome, particular ways we can actually grasp, talk about, and share with others.</p>
<h3 class="h2">T<small class="calibre3">HE</small> H<small class="calibre3">EART AND THE</small> S<small class="calibre3">KELETON</small></h3>
<p class="indent">If we think of the incarnation as sitting at the heart of the faith we hold, the Trinity might be understood more as the frame or the skeleton of our faith. Even if we who hold faith don’t give it a great deal of considered attention, we might notice it now and again, providing structure to our confessions and in a sense holding together the faith that holds us. In the Apostles’ Creed, for example, there is no mention of the Trinity—but the idea that God is Father, Son, and Holy Spirit serves as the outline of what we commonly refer to as the <em class="calibre8">three articles of the faith</em>: First, that we believe in God the Father (“almighty . . . Creator of Heaven and earth”). Second, that we believe in Jesus Christ (“his only Son, our Lord”). Third, that we believe in the Holy Spirit (and all the benefits of our faith that follow).</p>
<p class="indent"><a id="page_113" class="calibre7"></a>In addition to noticing that the doctrine of the Trinity helps frame Christian belief, we might rightly have the sense that it reminds us of the mystery of God. After all, we realize just as soon as we start really thinking about it, it is not possible for something to be <em class="calibre8">one</em> and <em class="calibre8">three</em> at exactly the same time. No amount of mathematical somersaults can prove, without logical fallacy, the equation 1=3 or 3=1. To remember God is triune is, then, to remember God is mysterious, beyond our knowing.</p>
<p class="indent">At the same time, however, the point of confessing the Trinity is not to remind us that God is mysterious in such a way that we feel ourselves standing at a distance from God, intimidated by what is impossible to understand. Too often, people of faith have treated the doctrine of the Trinity almost as if its primary purpose is to keep us at bay, reverently tip-toeing around any claims we might make about who God is. But if we think the point of the doctrine is that we need continuously to qualify whatever claims we make about God, humbled by God’s massive holiness, we may have missed what is the greatest mystery of all—that is, that to say God is triune is to celebrate the fact that the <em class="calibre8">God who is</em> has shown God’s own self to us in multiple ways. In creating us, redeeming us, and sustaining us; by enlivening us, healing us, and empowering us to do God’s work in the world, the triune God of life<a id="rch4en11" class="calibre7"></a><sup class="calibre12"><a href="notes.xhtml#ch4en11" class="calibre5">11</a></sup> does more than show us who God is. To confess God is triune is to recognize God actually shares life with us, inviting us to share life with God. Contrary to the stereotypes about the Trinity that associate it with some sort of esoteric piety, to confess God as Father, Son, and Holy Spirit is to insist God is <em class="calibre8">present</em> and <em class="calibre8">involved</em> in our day-to-day lives. As Catherine Mowry LaCugna suggests in her aptly titled book, <em class="calibre8">God for Us</em>, the Trinity is the most practical of all the Christian doctrines.<a id="rch4en12" class="calibre7"></a><sup class="calibre12"><a href="notes.xhtml#ch4en12" class="calibre5">12</a></sup> If the doctrine of the incarnation is all about God being <em class="calibre8">with</em> us, LaCugna and other contemporary theologians suggest, the doctrine of the Trinity is about God being <em class="calibre8">for</em> us.</p>
<p class="indent">Why does it matter so much, we might ask, that God is <em class="calibre8">for</em> us as well as <em class="calibre8">with</em> us? An analogy that might begin to get at an answer to this is that of a friend—let’s call her Melissa—being <em class="calibre8">with</em>, versus <em class="calibre8">with and for</em>, another friend—let’s call him Josh. Melissa can be <em class="calibre8">with</em> Josh, listening to his joys and his woes, helping him run errands when he is sick or cheering for him <a id="page_114" class="calibre7"></a>on Facebook when he accomplishes something wonderful. But it would be possible for Melissa to be with Josh without really being particularly <em class="calibre8">for</em> him. To be for him would be not only to participate in the assisting and the cheering, but also to act as his representative in the world: to insist that a space be made for who he is and what he can accomplish; to defend him in ways that enable him not only to survive in the world, but to thrive in it <em class="calibre8">as Josh</em>, as one who has a contribution to make to it.</p>
<p class="indent">The difference between being simply <em class="calibre8">with</em>, and being <em class="calibre8">with and for</em>, might also be compared to the difference between a parent who spends time connecting with a child who is struggling and accomplishing and a parent who is so committed to the child with whom he connects that he actively works at creating spaces in the world for her (e.g., by advocating for the child in relation to family members and teachers, by believing so strongly that she has something to contribute that he encourages her to speak, to act, to create, to practice). To be with, and only with, is to do pretty well by people—it is possible to enter into relationship to a child, or a friend, to rescue or to celebrate—and then return to our own familiar space, having paid a benevolent or supportive visit. But to be with as someone who is also <em class="calibre8">for</em> is not to visit with a friend or a child now and then, or even as frequently as possible, leaving them to live their lives independently of us between visits. It is not only to enter in and rescue a person in need, but to remain in solidarity, advocating for them in ways that make them present even when they are physically absent from the room or from the deliberations that are taking place. It is never to be separated from any of these, even when we are apart from them. It is to have them ever in mind and be ever making them present in conversations, in plans, in policies.</p>
<p class="indent">To say God is Trinity is to confess that the God who is with us in Jesus Christ is not only with us but also for us. It is to remember that what the incarnation is all about is far more than that a benevolent God paid us a visit and orchestrated a successful rescue operation on our behalf. It is to know the amazing truth that what we see in the person of Jesus Christ—and in the handiwork of God the Creator, and in the intercession of God the Spirit—is not only God <em class="calibre8">doing things</em> for us but God <em class="calibre8">being</em> for us. To be with, now and again or as much as is possible, is praiseworthy, <a id="page_115" class="calibre7"></a>helpful, and worthy of gratitude. It is to give benevolently, to share with those who reside outside of the sphere of oneself. To be with <em class="calibre8">always</em>, as one who is also <em class="calibre8">for</em>, is certainly worthy of gratitude. But there is an even more immediate response “being for” invokes, when one becomes cognizant of it—that is, a response of love. “If God is for us, who can be against us?” Paul asks, insisting that we love the God from whose love nothing can separate us.<a id="rch4en13" class="calibre7"></a><sup class="calibre12"><a href="notes.xhtml#ch4en13" class="calibre5">13</a></sup></p>
<p class="indent">In the remainder of this chapter I will imagine what possibilities emerge when the trinitarian insight that “God is for us” is in play, exploring the ways in which this framing doctrine of the Christian faith really matters to our daily lives. First, as I did in the chapter on incarnation, I will consider briefly how the doctrine developed. It is my hope that this will help pique the curiosity of the reader who may have the impression that the doctrine of the Trinity is one of the more anachronistic doctrines. Believing we can learn from our forebears’ passion, I want to ask: Why did people of faith, way back in the fourth century, care so much about understanding God as at the same time both one and three? What was at stake for them, and what is at stake for us in thinking through who God is—and we are—in these terms? Before we pursue these historical questions, however, allow me to set the context with a couple of anecdotes that will help us reflect on fourth-century debates about the Trinity in light of our own twenty-first-century context.</p>
<h3 class="h2">S<small class="calibre3">TORY</small> O<small class="calibre3">NE</small>: T<small class="calibre3">HE</small> C<small class="calibre3">HILDREN</small>’<small class="calibre3">S</small> S<small class="calibre3">ERMON</small> S<small class="calibre3">CRAMBLE</small></h3>
<p class="indent">When I teach theology classes, different groups of people feel more or less strongly about particular themes related to the doctrine of God. Presbyterians generally have strong views about God’s sovereignty, for example. Pentecostals listen carefully and critically to what I have to say about the Spirit, and just about everyone comes into the lecture room believing they know at least most of what there is to know about Jesus.</p>
<p class="indent"><a id="page_116" class="calibre7"></a>When it comes to the Trinity, however, I encounter a great deal of ambivalence. It is almost as if people know better than to ask if we can skip over it, but can’t for the life of them figure out how confessing God as one-in-three-and-three-in-one could possibly matter to their actual lives. Often the impression seems to be that talking about God in this way must have meant something in a bygone day, but really means very little now. Sure, some students concede, they like singing the hymn “Holy, Holy, Holy,”<a id="rch4en14" class="calibre7"></a><sup class="calibre12"><a href="notes.xhtml#ch4en14" class="calibre5">14</a></sup> but they don’t really think much about what it’s all about.</p>
<p class="indent">It is easy to get snagged by the temptation to treat God as a kind of puzzle. We ask: How can 3 = 1 and 1 = 3? There are all kinds of answers we can come up with, especially if we feel pressure to say something. One annual occasion that inevitably supplies such pressure is Trinity Sunday, the Sunday following Pentecost. Doing the children’s sermon is often, for many, a dreaded assignment, but I would bet there is no Sunday that it is more actively avoided than on Trinity Sunday. How do you explain the Trinity to fifteen children gathered round? Hmmm. What <em class="calibre8">would</em> a children’s sermon on the Trinity look like? Imagine this:</p>
<p class="blockquotet">Good morning, kids. Today we’re going to talk about the Trinity. Can you say “Trinity”? Now I’ve brought along my Bunsen burner, and I’m just going to flip it on and—don’t touch that, Hannah!—Let’s all look in this saucepan. What do I have in here? That’s right, ice cubes. And you know what? Ice cubes are also called H<sub class="calibre17">2</sub>O. Can you say H<sub class="calibre17">2</sub>O? Now I’m just going to put these ice cubes on the burner and . . . what’s happening now? That’s right . . . they’re melting. What’s in the saucepan now? Water? Guess what, boys and girls? Water is also H<sub class="calibre17">2</sub>O. Can you say H<sub class="calibre17">2</sub>O? Okay . . . now the water is getting hotter and hotter and (don’t touch that, Hannah!) . . . what’s that wispy stuff coming off the top of it? No, Johnny, not smoke . . . that’s called steam. And guess what? Steam is also H<sub class="calibre17">2</sub>O. Can you say H<sub class="calibre17">2</sub>O?</p>
<p class="noindentt">And then you go for your big transition:</p>
<p class="blockquotet">God is kind of like H2O. Just like H2O can be ice, and water, and steam, so God is Father, Son, and Holy Spirit.</p>
<p class="noindentt">That afternoon, you receive a phone call. It is an irate parent:</p>
<p class="blockquotet"><a id="page_117" class="calibre7"></a>When my kid got home he opened the freezer and said, “M-o-m! What’s God doing in here?”</p>
<p class="noindentt">And you realize you’ve failed to convey a meaningful point. Instead of expressing to those kids why it matters that we believe God is triune, you’ve treated the Trinity as though it is some kind of a puzzle, a mathematical marvel to be figured out. Even if we could come up with the perfect way of explaining the three-in-one—people have tried an apple (with core, flesh, and skin), a pie cut into three pieces, a family with three members—we still would not have answered the important question everyone is wondering about, which is: So what? Why does the Christian confession that God is triune matter to our lives of faith?</p>
<p class="indent">In trying to explain the mystery rather than participating in it, we have dropped the theological ball. Trinity becomes a colder, more calculated doctrine. Unable to figure out the mathematics of it, we might throw up our hands and cry: I don’t know . . . it’s a mystery! When we do this, we have actually betrayed mystery for “mystification.”<a id="rch4en15" class="calibre7"></a><sup class="calibre12"><a href="notes.xhtml#ch4en15" class="calibre5">15</a></sup></p>
<p class="indent">The problem with invoking the category of <em class="calibre8">mystery</em> in order to justify giving up on the pursuit of understanding is that it forgets the mystical character of mystery itself. Throwing up our hands and ceasing to try may be an appropriate response to failing in a task such as, for example, solving a Rubik’s cube. We might decide it is just not worth the effort to figure out how to get each side of a cube a single color. When we give up on solving a Rubik’s cube, it is not because the cube transcends the capacities of human understanding. We know there are people who can solve it even if we cannot or don’t want to. When it comes to the doctrine of the Trinity, by contrast, there is no one who can solve the problem of how 3 = 1 and 1 = 3 because whatever these equations are doing, they are not trying to invite us into the challenge of problem-solving. Rather, what they are trying to invoke in us is an appreciation of the fact that who the triune God <em class="calibre8">is</em> is beyond any human formulations. The mystery is not the solution to the puzzle of how 1 and 3 can be made equal. The mystery we are invited into is, rather, that God is, at once, both equally one and three. What might look like a puzzle or a riddle is, actually, itself an answer: a statement of who God is. Our task is not to decipher it, but to recognize it participates <a id="page_118" class="calibre7"></a>in a deeper meaning than can be captured by any neat and tidy solution and to discern what it is about and how it affects us. As is the case with all mysteries, figuring out what the doctrine of the Trinity is about requires attention that, in turn, requires we create time and space for reflection and contemplation.</p>
<p class="indent">It is through thinking about the inexplicable mystery of the three-in-one that we can, in fact, come to participate more deeply in the “so what” of it. As Gregory of Nazianzus once put it: “I cannot think on the one without quickly being encircled by the splendor of the three; nor can I discern the three without being straightway carried back to the one.”<a id="rch4en16" class="calibre7"></a><sup class="calibre12"><a href="notes.xhtml#ch4en16" class="calibre5">16</a></sup> The experience of Gregory doesn’t yet get us to the “so what” of the Trinity in our day-to-day lives, but it is, I think, “thinking on the one,” then “thinking on the three,” then moving back to “thinking on the one” that is the necessary precursor to figuring out what the Trinity is all about.</p>
<h3 class="h2">S<small class="calibre3">TORY</small> T<small class="calibre3">WO</small>: T<small class="calibre3">HE</small> E<small class="calibre3">NCOURAGING</small>, H<small class="calibre3">EARTBREAKING</small> L<small class="calibre3">ETTER</small></h3>
<p class="indent">I remember the first time I tried to talk out loud about why the Trinity matters. It was hard. Harder, even, than talking about why the incarnation matters to our lives of faith. As challenging as it is to think through the “so what” of Jesus being fully human and fully divine, at least you are thinking about a <em class="calibre8">person</em> and not about syncing two different numbers.<a id="rch4en17" class="calibre7"></a><sup class="calibre12"><a href="notes.xhtml#ch4en17" class="calibre5">17</a></sup> So trained we are to try to solve puzzles or provide answers to equations that we are inclined to treat the nature of the triune God as if it is a conundrum to be solved, as in the case of the children’s sermon imagined above. One of the strategies I used to try to think in a different way about the Trinity was to say out loud what my alternative children’s sermon would be. In other words, if I wouldn’t tell the kids that the Trinity is like H<sub class="calibre17">2</sub>O, what would I say? Imagine this, as a Sunday morning children’s sermon:</p>
<p class="blockquotet">Kids, today we are going to talk about the Trinity. When we say God is Trinity we remember God is “tri” or three: God is the Father who loves us, the Son we know as Jesus Christ, and the Holy Spirit who is with us right now, <a id="page_119" class="calibre7"></a>reminding us of God’s love and grace in this time of worship. But the God who is three is also always one. That sounds kind of silly, doesn’t it—that God is one and three at the same time? This doesn’t make any sense to us because we cannot be one and three at the same time, can we? We can’t understand it, but we can know what it is about. When we say God is Trinity, what it means is that God loves us because God is love. The Father loves the Son, Jesus—and Jesus loves the Father God the way we love our mothers, our fathers, and the people who take care of us and believe in us no matter what. And sometimes we think of the Holy Spirit as the way God reminds us that we are loved too! The God who is Trinity includes us in God’s love. Isn’t that great? We are not left behind, but included in the love of God’s family. On Trinity Sunday, we remember that this is why it matters that we say God is three and one, all at the same time. To say God is “Trinity” is to remember how much God loves and includes us!</p>
<p class="indentt">A children’s sermon along these lines, which might be framed in several different ways, steers clear of trying to do bad or impossible math and attempting somehow to prove the faulty equation 1 = 3 or 3 = 1. Even if such a thing could be proven, by the way, what good would such a proof do us? We might gain the reputation for being mathematical wizards, but we would have lost the opportunity to think through how this fundamental confession shapes the way we understand God and our relationship to God.</p>
<p class="indent">Moving from thinking about how to convey the “so what” of the Trinity to children to thinking of what I would say to adults, I developed my first lectures on “Why the Trinity Matters” beginning about twenty years ago, giving them in my introductory theology class and at various continuing education events. I’ll never forget a letter I received from a retired schoolteacher who had attended an event at which I had spoken about the Trinity. The letter is several pages long. After saying her eyes had been opened, by way of the lecture, to what the Trinity was all about, and after adding her own keen insights and implications to what she explained she had learned, this woman closed her letter by expressing great pain and frustration, almost grief. “I just don’t understand why I never heard any of this before. I’ve been going to church my whole life, and I’ve always been one to ask a lot of questions. But no one ever said anything about this,” she wrote. “I was told, only, that I had to accept the mystery of the <a id="page_120" class="calibre7"></a>Trinity, but never how it made a difference to my life. If only I had known this years ago,” she continued. “I think my life would have been different. I would have known how much I meant to God. I’m angry that no one ever told me, if you want to know the truth. I just don’t understand why.”</p>
<p class="indent">What this wise woman rightly recognized is that the main themes of my lecture were not composed of ideas to which only select people had the wherewithal to gain access. What she was hearing from me was not excessively brilliant, as though—again—I was sharing some hard-to-grasp method for solving a Rubik’s cube. What I said was basic, but she recognized it as profound: to say God is triune, I taught, is to say God is love, God is relational, God acts, and God is knowable. All that woman needed from me, in the lecture that helped her, were a few gestures to the “so what” of who the triune God is in relation to her life of faith. She needed someone to point out the simple truth that to say God is love, related, acting, and knowable is to say God has met us and claimed us as God’s own. The woman was frustrated, as she expressed it in her letter, because she recognized these connections as being fairly easy to make for anyone who has been invited to consider them. More importantly, she perceived them to be essential to her own—and to everyone’s—spiritual well-being.</p>
<p class="indent">Every time I think about this woman’s letter, I recommit myself to doing my best to invite people to see the connections between God’s character as three-in-one and the claim God makes on each of us. I learned that this faithful woman died a couple of years after she sent me this letter. I may have helped her think about something she had always wondered about, but her legacy to me continues to be a reminder to me, over and over again, to help people quit trying to figure out how to explain the mathematics of the Trinity so they can focus on how the doctrine might transform the ways we think of God and ourselves. This is the joyous work of the remainder of this chapter. We will first retrieve a bit of the passion for the doctrine of the Trinity had by our fourth-century forebears, and then move on to considering how the doctrine of the Trinity undoes any conceptions of God that keep God and creation at a distance from one another. Instead, the Christian confession that God is triune invites us to participate in the beautiful dance of God’s action in the world.</p>
<h3 class="h2"><a id="page_121" class="calibre5"></a>G<small class="calibre3">ETTING TO</small> I<small class="calibre3">T</small>: F<small class="calibre3">OURTH</small>-C<small class="calibre3">ENTURY</small> P<small class="calibre3">ASSION FOR</small> W<small class="calibre3">HY THE</small> T<small class="calibre3">RINITY</small> M<small class="calibre3">ATTERS</small></h3>
<p class="indent">In the last chapter we gave brief consideration to two ecclesial councils: the Council of Nicea (325) and the Council of Chalcedon (451). While of course debates about the Trinity have gone on for centuries and still continue today, the time period between Nicea and Chalcedon was an especially rich period for development of the doctrine.<a id="rch4en18" class="calibre7"></a><sup class="calibre12"><a href="notes.xhtml#ch4en18" class="calibre5">18</a></sup></p>
<p class="indent">As in the case of the christological controversies, the trinitarian debates were committed to honoring both God’s unsearchable character and God’s self-revelation in discrete moments and events of history. Nicea and Chalcedon were marked by the concern that Jesus’s full divinity and full humanity were equally and wholly represented. Similarly, at the Council of Alexandria (362) and the Council of Constantinople (381) the operative concern was how simultaneously to honor both the unity of the Godhead and the particular contributions and actions of each of the trinitarian persons—Father, Son, and Holy Spirit. As was true at both Nicea and Chalcedon, there were two main schools of thought represented at Alexandria, the gathering committed to the work and debate that led to the development of the trinitarian formula that was adopted at Constantinople in 381.</p>
<p class="indent">On the Western side (which came, later, to be represented by Augustine—though he was only about eight years old in 362!) there was a great deal of emphasis on the <em class="calibre8">oneness</em> or unity of God. Westerners tended to focus their discussions about the Trinity, along these lines, on what became known as the <em class="calibre8">immanent Trinity</em>—God in God’s own internal relationships to the triune self. The concern of the West was that, if we overemphasize God’s distinct actions as Father, Son, and Holy Spirit, we will finally move too far astray of monotheism and be functioning as though we believe in three gods, rather than the one true God. By thinking of God first as one, and then as three, they thought, the Christian church could ensure we were not committing the heresy of <em class="calibre8">tritheism</em>, respecting the fundamental Christian insight that God is the one, undivided, sovereign being who is Lord of all.</p>
<p class="indent"><a id="page_122" class="calibre7"></a>The Eastern side, represented by the three Cappadocian Fathers (Gregory of Nyssa, Gregory of Nazianzus, and Basil the Great) agreed with the Westerners that God’s oneness should be respected. They nonetheless took another approach to reflecting on this Trinity, beginning their discussion with the threeness of God rather than orienting discussion of “Father, Son, and Holy Spirit” around the divine simplicity. <em class="calibre8">Epistemological</em> concerns<a id="rch4en19" class="calibre7"></a><sup class="calibre12"><a href="notes.xhtml#ch4en19" class="calibre5">19</a></sup> drove the Cappadocians’ agenda. For them, it didn’t make sense that we could dive in and begin thinking about who God is as one without first recognizing God in God’s acts on our behalf. God meets us by creating us, redeeming us, and sustaining us, the Cappadocians thought, and it is in these and other acts of God that we come to know the divine unity. Their emphasis—on the acts of God, rather than on the being of God, came to be identified as the <em class="calibre8">economic Trinity</em>. The Cappadocians defended themselves against the Western accusation of tritheism by developing a model, along the lines just described, that later came to be called the <em class="calibre8">social model</em> of the Trinity. It is a model that has been developed and is today espoused by theologians including Jürgen Moltmann.<a id="rch4en20" class="calibre7"></a><sup class="calibre12"><a href="notes.xhtml#ch4en20" class="calibre5">20</a></sup></p>
<p class="indent">Even as they defended themselves, the Cappadocians made accusations of their own against the Westerners, complaining that the Western take veered dangerously close to the heresy of <em class="calibre8">modalism</em>. Modalism is the idea that the one God more or less “morphs” into each of the three persons as each is needed. God starts out as Creator, then takes the form of the Son when redemption is required, then finally is present as the Spirit when we need comforting. As the Cappadocians defended themselves against the charge of tritheism, so the Westerners insisted they had no intention of compromising on the fact of God’s triunity. If the goal of the Cappadocians’ framing of the doctrine was epistemological, the concern of the Westerners was <em class="calibre8">ontological</em><a id="rch4en21" class="calibre7"></a><sup class="calibre12"><a href="notes.xhtml#ch4en21" class="calibre5">21</a></sup>—they wanted to be sure there was no compromise to the being of God in the way they formulated their understanding of the one-in-three.</p>
<p class="indent">Just as both sides, in the Chalcedonian debate of 451, agreed with Gregory of Nazianzus’s position that that which is not assumed is not redeemed,<a id="rch4en22" class="calibre7"></a><sup class="calibre12"><a href="notes.xhtml#ch4en22" class="calibre5">22</a></sup> so there were major points of agreement between both sides of the trinitarian debates that took place at the council of Alexandria in 362.<a id="rch4en23" class="calibre7"></a><sup class="calibre12"><a href="notes.xhtml#ch4en23" class="calibre5">23</a></sup> <a id="page_123" class="calibre7"></a>All reaffirmed, against the earlier Arian heresy, that the Son is the same stuff (<em class="calibre8">homoousios</em>) with the Father. Both sides affirmed the Holy Spirit is of the same stuff as well. All agreed, even though they had different starting points and emphases, that God is both one and three, both three and one, and that tritheism and modalism are heretical extremes that need be avoided. All agreed with what became a classic way of articulating how it is that the three persons are considered distinct from one another even as all three are considered equally to be God. “The Father is not the Son or the Spirit,” the saying goes. “The Son is not the Father or the Spirit,” it continues. “And the Spirit is not the Father or the Son. But all three are equally God,” it concludes. This is a way of thinking that honors both the oneness and the threeness of God without compromising on either.</p>
<p class="indent">These significant similarities between the Eastern and Western churches might actually serve to accentuate the differences between them. I think of it this way: the people I fight hardest with are often those with whom I have the most in common. Because we share so much, I care even more that they share, or at least see the value of, my perspective. When I talk with people who are Muslim, I am happy to find points of similarity between what they think, spiritually speaking, and what I think. But when I talk to someone who is Christian, I take the similarities we share for granted, almost, honing in on our differences and trying to persuade them about matters I take to be of common concern. While part of the reason I try to persuade them is no doubt because I want the satisfaction of proving myself right, the better part of me goes after small points of difference between myself and other Christians because we are somehow drawn closer together when we debate doctrines for which we together share a passion. Arguing about points of difference is a tricky enterprise, as all of us know. It we push things too far, we can wind up divided further from those we want nearer to us. But if we ignore differences, never representing our views or trying to convince each other about the things that matter most, we can find ourselves living on opposite sides of a silent divide rather than manifesting the visible unity we claim is a characteristic of Christian community.<a id="rch4en24" class="calibre7"></a><sup class="calibre12"><a href="notes.xhtml#ch4en24" class="calibre5">24</a></sup></p>
<p class="indent"><a id="page_124" class="calibre7"></a>The point of heated debate between the Eastern and Western churches is something that was seeded in Alexandria in 362 and developed until the point of the Great Schism between the Eastern and Western churches, which took place in 1054.<a id="rch4en25" class="calibre7"></a><sup class="calibre12"><a href="notes.xhtml#ch4en25" class="calibre5">25</a></sup> The focus of it might, at first, sound somewhat trivial. Sometimes it is lamented that, if a single vowel determines the difference between christological orthodoxy and christological heresy (<em class="calibre8">homoousios</em> versus <em class="calibre8">homoiousios</em>, as discussed in the last chapter) a single prepositional phrase has divided the body of Christ for over a thousand years. The phrase is “and the Son,” commonly known, in the Latin, as the <em class="calibre8">filioque</em> clause.</p>
<p class="indent">The <em class="calibre8">filioque</em> clause was not introduced until 589, at the Council of Toledo in Spain.<a id="rch4en26" class="calibre7"></a><sup class="calibre12"><a href="notes.xhtml#ch4en26" class="calibre5">26</a></sup> Obviously, this is over two hundred years after the Council of Alexandria, but the concerns the Eastern church had about the Western church’s understanding of the Trinity, and vice versa, continued to endure. At the Council of Toledo, the Westerners added the phrase to the Nicene Creed because they believed it helped preserve the unity of God. “We believe in the Holy Spirit, the Lord, the Giver of Life, who proceeds from the Father <em class="calibre8">and the Son</em>, and who with the Father and the Son is worshipped and glorified.” The thinking of the Western church was that subscribing to the “double procession” of the Holy Spirit, from both the Father and the Son, helps us conceptualize the life of the triune God in a more coherent manner. It is more consistent, for example, with some of the Augustinian analogies for the trinitarian God that, by 589, were shaping Western Christendom. God the Father is the Lover, God the Son the Beloved, and God the Spirit is the bond of love between them, Augustine had taught.<a id="rch4en27" class="calibre7"></a><sup class="calibre12"><a href="notes.xhtml#ch4en27" class="calibre5">27</a></sup> The Spirit, Westerners believed, in a very real sense ensures the unity of the triune Godhead by bearing witness to the relationship between the Father and the Son. The idea that the Father <em class="calibre8">and the Son</em> together send the Holy Spirit further reinforces that they are united by way of the Spirit who continues their shared work in the world.</p>
<p class="indent">The Eastern church was and still is understandably chagrined that the <em class="calibre8">filioque</em> clause was added to the Creed, not only because they disagreed with what it represented theologically, but also because the Western church has acted poorly, from a political standpoint, when they voted <a id="page_125" class="calibre7"></a>on the addition without their agreement.<a id="rch4en28" class="calibre7"></a><sup class="calibre12"><a href="notes.xhtml#ch4en28" class="calibre5">28</a></sup> It is clear, however, that the Easterners would not have endorsed the addition even if they had been included in the deliberations. Suspecting the Western church of being modalistic, their conviction was that the <em class="calibre8">filioque</em> clause renders the Holy Spirit passive, and in this way compromises on the Spirit’s status as equally God. The Father and the Son are actively engaged in sending, but the Spirit is, only, <em class="calibre8">sent</em>. The Spirit, moreover, seems finally to be an extension of the Father and Son’s relationship rather than, truly, her own, distinct person. It is almost as if the Eastern church interpreted the addition of the <em class="calibre8">filioque</em> as a clear indication the Western church is “binitarian” rather than “trinitarian.”</p>
<p class="indent">These debates that raged from Alexandria (362) to the schism (1054) continue to have an impact on the global unity of the church. Still today, those who subscribe to the <em class="calibre8">filioque</em> are not permitted to take Communion at the Table in Greek and Russian Orthodox churches, precisely due to the concern that only those who are trinitarian are members of the one body of Christ and are invited, by him, to partake. Efforts to develop ecumenical versions of the Nicene Creed that can be said with no finger crossing by both Westerners and Easterners have mainly failed. In one version, the <em class="calibre8">filioque</em> clause is included, but is set in parentheses, the idea being that those who want to say it can, and those who do not wish to say it may leave it out.<a id="rch4en29" class="calibre7"></a><sup class="calibre12"><a href="notes.xhtml#ch4en29" class="calibre5">29</a></sup> This is far from satisfying to either Eastern or Western Christian traditions, appearing to diminish the stakes of the debate itself.</p>
<p class="indent">More recently, there have been Westerners who have argued Christians should set aside the <em class="calibre8">filioque</em> clause for the sake of ecumenical unity. LaCugna argues, for example, that Westerners should return to the insights of the Cappadocians as a way of correcting theological errors emerging from overemphasis on God’s <em class="calibre8">substance</em> at the expense of God’s <em class="calibre8">person</em>. Clearly, LaCugna argues, the Cappadocians are right that we come to know God by way of God’s acts. What is amazing, she thinks, is that God’s acts give us clear and reliable insight into who God is in God’s being.<a id="rch4en30" class="calibre7"></a><sup class="calibre12"><a href="notes.xhtml#ch4en30" class="calibre5">30</a></sup> Moltmann has advocated setting the <em class="calibre8">filioque</em> to the side, similarly, if only for the sake of ecumenical relations, because he believes the unity of <a id="page_126" class="calibre7"></a>the church matters. It is hypocritical for Christians to keep singing “they will know we are Christians by our love” without actively working to meet and claim others identified with the body of Christ.<a id="rch4en31" class="calibre7"></a><sup class="calibre12"><a href="notes.xhtml#ch4en31" class="calibre5">31</a></sup></p>
<p class="indent">In addition to supporting ecumenical unity, Moltmann suggests setting aside the <em class="calibre8">filioque</em> creates space to explore differently the doctrines of the Christian faith. In <em class="calibre8">The Way of Jesus Christ: Christology in Its Messianic Dimensions</em>, for example, Moltmann considers how we might understand who Jesus Christ is and what he does differently if we interpreted everything about his life in terms of the movement of the Holy Spirit.<a id="rch4en32" class="calibre7"></a><sup class="calibre12"><a href="notes.xhtml#ch4en32" class="calibre5">32</a></sup> Teasing out the implications of this, it seems to me that, when we think of Jesus as being enlivened by the Spirit as he teaches, heals, and socializes, we find it easier to understand how it is that we may abide in him, and he in us—we are joined by way of the very same Spirit, the one who indwells us is the very one who indwells him, facilitating our participation. Moltmann ends his discussion in <em class="calibre8">The Trinity and the Kingdom</em> along similar lines, with the idea that the Spirit makes it possible for us not only to be “servants” of God, but also God’s “friends”—partners with God in the ministry of reconciliation.<a id="rch4en33" class="calibre7"></a><sup class="calibre12"><a href="notes.xhtml#ch4en33" class="calibre5">33</a></sup> We will engage these creative possibilities in the chapters following, particularly in our discussion of vocation and hope. For now, the important point to notice is that the seemingly archaic debate about the relationship of the “one” and the “three,” as it began at Alexandria and has been shaped in the course of the <em class="calibre8">filioque</em> debate, continues to matter to Christians who hold faith.</p>
<p class="indent">Acknowledging just how much our forebears cared about thinking in the very best way they could about who God is, and how Father/Son/Spirit—Creator/Redeemer/Sustainer—are at once both united and distinguished, we turn now to exploring the “so what” of this history to our lives of faith today. Even as aspects of these past debates seem silly to us, we might ask ourselves if we can concede that we have our own silliness: we do not talk <em class="calibre8">enough</em> about these things! Karl Rahner once joked that, if it were ever announced that “a fourth person of the Trinity has been discovered,” it would cause “little stir”!<a id="rch4en34" class="calibre7"></a><sup class="calibre12"><a href="notes.xhtml#ch4en34" class="calibre5">34</a></sup> As that retired woman who wrote to me after that lecture noted, it is time we started talking, more, about the difference the doctrine of the Trinity can make to our lives.</p>
<h3 class="h2"><a id="page_127" class="calibre5"></a>S<small class="calibre3">CANDALOUS</small> P<small class="calibre3">RESENCE</small>: T<small class="calibre3">HE</small> T<small class="calibre3">RINITY AND</small> C<small class="calibre3">HRISTIAN</small> L<small class="calibre3">IFE</small></h3>
<p class="indent">In the preceding chapter I noted that Jesus Christ reveals God is not who we may have expected God to be. I mentioned the theological concept called “the scandal of particularity”—that the very idea the God who holds the waters of the universe “in the hollow of God’s hand” enters into one, particular historical person is in some sense outlandish.<a id="rch4en35" class="calibre7"></a><sup class="calibre12"><a href="notes.xhtml#ch4en35" class="calibre5">35</a></sup> Kierkegaard used a word to describe this phenomenon that is usually translated “offense.”<a id="rch4en36" class="calibre7"></a><sup class="calibre12"><a href="notes.xhtml#ch4en36" class="calibre5">36</a></sup> Saying we are “offended” by the way God meets us in Jesus Christ and by the way God claims us in the persons of Father, Son, and Spirit might rattle us even more than saying we are “scandalized.” Who are we, after all, to be offended by God? But if we take a step back from our resistance to Kierkegaard’s language, for a minute, we might be able to see that what offends us is not as much who God is as that God’s self-revelation does not fit with how we expect God to act or who we expect God to be.</p>
<p class="indent">When I am trying to imagine or explain what being scandalized looks like, I sometimes think of that classic scene in <em class="calibre8">The Sound of Music</em> where Captain von Trapp returns home from a trip only to discover that his very own children have been running around in play clothes made out of old curtains. Such a thing just isn’t done; not by <em class="calibre8">his</em> children, he thinks. He is at a loss even to grasp the reality of what is going on, so antithetical it is to how he understands things to be.<a id="rch4en37" class="calibre7"></a><sup class="calibre12"><a href="notes.xhtml#ch4en37" class="calibre5">37</a></sup> Another example that evokes the kind of core incredulity associated with scandal is the scene in <em class="calibre8">Monty Python and the Holy Grail</em><a id="rch4en38" class="calibre7"></a><sup class="calibre12"><a href="notes.xhtml#ch4en38" class="calibre5">38</a></sup> when the cows are catapulted over a wall. Such a thing simply isn’t done; to interpret it at all takes breaking out of all our usual categories of understanding and thinking in an altogether different sort of way. Finally, when I try to imagine being scandalized, I remember a little history: when Amelia Bloomer, one of the early American suffragettes, became tired of negotiating her hoop skirts, she traded them in for pants that were disparagingly referred to as “bloomers.” Who could imagine any respectable woman ever dressing in such a way? Scandalous!</p>
<p class="indent"><a id="page_128" class="calibre7"></a>In the last chapter I considered how scandalous it is that God meets us by entering the womb of Mary, eating with tax collectors and sinners, dying on the cross, and refusing to leave behind his body—and all the bodies of this world, by association—at the point of the resurrection. Writing in particular about the scandalous character of the cross, Paul acknowledges the crucifixion as “a stumbling block to Jews and foolishness to Gentiles.”<a id="rch4en39" class="calibre7"></a><sup class="calibre12"><a href="notes.xhtml#ch4en39" class="calibre5">39</a></sup> If there is anywhere we have difficulty believing God meets us, it is in the concrete experiences of our sufferings. On the one hand, as many of our early forebears would agree, it appears unseemly for the God who is self-derived and all-in-all actually to suffer. On the other hand, however, this experience of feeling scandalized or offended is, it seems, not something Christians would want to settle into, since their hope lies in the fact that, as Dietrich Bonhoeffer puts it, “only a suffering God can help.”<a id="rch4en40" class="calibre7"></a><sup class="calibre12"><a href="notes.xhtml#ch4en40" class="calibre5">40</a></sup> Perhaps that is why, then, the incredulity Christians experience when they encounter an unexpected God, in Jesus Christ, ideally gives way to awe and gratitude.</p>
<p class="indent">The scandal of the incarnation is perhaps obvious, especially when we think about God in relationship to the womb and the cross. But what is so scandalous about the Trinity?</p>
<p class="indent">Here, the history of conflict between the Eastern and Western church gives us some hints. There is something about the coexistence of the <em class="calibre8">three</em> and the <em class="calibre8">one</em>, in the life of God, that seemed to everyone quite precarious. In a sense, the East may have overcorrected on one side of the dilemma, and the West on the other side. But it is harder than it looks, theologically speaking, <em class="calibre8">not</em> to overcorrect, when one is concerned about avoiding making theological errors that can lead to unintended consequences. How do we at all moments understand Jesus Christ to be fully human and fully divine? How do we actually think about God as simultaneously one and three? In the final analysis, many people of faith saw the solution developed at Alexandria (362) and adopted at Constantinople (381) as being of very little help. “God is one <em class="calibre8">ousia</em> in three <em class="calibre8">hypostases</em>,” the statement said.<a id="rch4en41" class="calibre7"></a><sup class="calibre12"><a href="notes.xhtml#ch4en41" class="calibre5">41</a></sup> The language of “substance” and “persons” (“God is one <em class="calibre8">substance</em> in three <em class="calibre8">persons</em>”) developed later,<a id="rch4en42" class="calibre7"></a><sup class="calibre12"><a href="notes.xhtml#ch4en42" class="calibre5">42</a></sup> and actually strayed pretty far from the original Greek terminology. What we know about the meaning of <em class="calibre8">ousia</em> and <a id="page_129" class="calibre7"></a><em class="calibre8">hypostases</em> is that they were almost synonymous. It was as though the wisdom of the council was to say that both the Eastern side and the Western side of the debate had something of value to contribute that needed to be preserved and considered. While this confusing language frustrated many, Kelly describes the deliberation at Alexandria as “statesmanlike” because it invited conversation about what was meant, and kept people from both sides of the debate in conversation.<a id="rch4en43" class="calibre7"></a><sup class="calibre12"><a href="notes.xhtml#ch4en43" class="calibre5">43</a></sup></p>
<p class="indent">What is so scandalous about the Trinity is reflected in the statement itself, I believe. It is that somehow, in the life of God, unity and distinction coexist, each wholly and without compromise. This is unfathomable to us, it seems, in part because, for us, “individualization” and “participation”<a id="rch4en44" class="calibre7"></a><sup class="calibre12"><a href="notes.xhtml#ch4en44" class="calibre5">44</a></sup> stand always in conflicting relationship to one another. Think about it: where the value of distinction is emphasized, achieving unity seems to be an almost constant struggle. Individuals, with their individual priorities, gifts, opinions, lives, and schedules have to be <em class="calibre8">convinced</em> to enter into communion with others, and even when they actively try to be part of a <em class="calibre8">one</em>, there are constant struggles and conflicts that get in the way of relationships being harmonious. Couples break up; families bicker; nations cannot see their way clear to set aside partisan politics and join together to create a common good. Ecclesial and educational institutions seem unable to emphasize frequently or strongly enough how important it is for everyone to make a contribution, for the sake of the well-being of the whole. If you, the reader, are a church leader or any kind of educator gifted at planning events for groups of people, you no doubt spend significant amounts of time and energy trying to figure out new ways to sell autonomously driven people on the idea that they should budget blocks of time to go to Bible studies and potlucks, fund-raising events and PTA meetings. “Please come if you can,” we beg and plead, “it’s really important; we really need you; you can make a difference.” In our radically, autonomous twenty-first-century American culture, no case needs to be made for threeness, if threeness represents the distinction between members of the whole. The case we are constantly trying to make, on the contrary, is why commitment should be made to the one.</p>
<p class="indent"><a id="page_130" class="calibre7"></a>Rarely, in our culture, do we have to convince anyone to disengage from the community and to spend more time developing their autonomous selves. It is almost comical to imagine a pastor, for example, saying to members of a US congregation that they should be careful about going to <em class="calibre8">too many</em> church events since—as those made in the image of the triune God—they are responsible for nurturing their distinction from others as well as their unity with them. Nonetheless, there are the rare cases when someone is burned out by volunteering too much, giving too much of herself to the community. “You need to take more time for yourself,” we tell that person. Which might perhaps be translated, in Trinity-speak, as “you have emphasized oneness at the expense of threeness and need, now, to reclaim and nurture your distinctiveness. You are being far more Cappadocian than Augustinian, and now it is time to take a step back toward the West!”</p>
<p class="indent">Well, you wouldn’t say <em class="calibre8">that</em>, exactly. But perhaps you have some sense of what I mean.</p>
<p class="indent">The fact is, the way we think about God impacts profoundly the way we think about ourselves. This is how it should be, it seems to me, since we are made in the image of a God who did not morph from one to three somewhere between Malachi and Matthew.<a id="rch4en45" class="calibre7"></a><sup class="calibre12"><a href="notes.xhtml#ch4en45" class="calibre5">45</a></sup> We are made in the image of the triune God, and that means individualization and participation are not in conflict. Just as we see, when we look at the person of Jesus Christ, that sin is an aberration when it comes to our true humanity, so we witness something beautiful about ourselves when we stop to contemplate the harmonious relationship between the <em class="calibre8">one</em> and the <em class="calibre8">three</em> in the being of God. Made in God’s image, the constant conflicts we have between living as individuals and living in community are the aberration. From the standpoint of faith, this is a pretty bold thing to say: that we are holding on to the hope that distinct individuals really do add to the strength of the one community, and that the one community allows for real distinction among and between individuals. Can you imagine if we believed this into being, in our everyday lives in this world? It would mean, among other things, that the fear of the distinct “other” could fall away, replaced by joyful anticipation of the way unity could be enhanced by communion <a id="page_131" class="calibre7"></a>together. It would mean that being united would not mean some getting lost for the sake of others to thrive—rather, each would be honored, in the context of the one. The unity of the Trinity reminds us, because it always stands in dialectical tension with the threeness, that neither our union with Christ in the life of God nor our union with one another, as members of Christ’s body, is anything like being drawn into a continuum in which particular identities are lost for the sake of the whole. The oneness realized and opened up to us by the Trinity is different in kind than the kind of unity advocated by nation states, religious sects, and household structures that promise honor to those who sacrifice their particular identities; it is different in kind, to use another example, from the community of the Borg (on <em class="calibre8">Star Trek</em>) that forces loss of particular identities. “You will be assimilated,” says the Borg. “Resistance is futile.”<a id="rch4en46" class="calibre7"></a><sup class="calibre12"><a href="notes.xhtml#ch4en46" class="calibre5">46</a></sup> By contrast to this, life in the God who is triune promises we will <em class="calibre8">not</em> be assimilated, but will be valued as the unique individuals we are. Our lives, “hidden with Christ in God,”<a id="rch4en47" class="calibre7"></a><sup class="calibre12"><a href="notes.xhtml#ch4en47" class="calibre5">47</a></sup> are still distinguished from one another.</p>
<p class="indent">What is so scandalous about the doctrine of the Trinity, then, is that it completely undoes our conception of what kind of place the world really is. What the world <em class="calibre8">actually is</em>, to be sure, is broken by sin, characterized more often than not by conflicts between individual needs and desires and communal concerns. But the doctrine of the Trinity will not allow anyone who truly subscribes to it ever to be complacent or accepting of such tensions and conflicts on the grounds that “this is just the way the world is.” On the contrary, to join the rhythm of the scandal is to keep moving back and forth between the <em class="calibre8">one</em> and the <em class="calibre8">three</em>, refusing to give up on the possibility that each can fund the other that is built into the fabric of creation itself. We are made, after all, in the image of the God in which individualization and participation are perfectly in sync.</p>
<p class="indent">Along these lines, I even think the doctrine of the Trinity has something to say about the way we think about heaven. Commonly, I hear people of faith speculating about whether or not they will be able to recognize others in the world to come. Some say yes to this with confidence, but others seem worried about overstating what heaven will be like. “I don’t think we will be able to recognize each other in heaven,” a woman <a id="page_132" class="calibre7"></a>at a church I was teaching in recently confided in me. “I think all of that will kind of dissolve, so that we will really and finally be ‘one’ in Christ.” This woman did not seem entirely happy with that prospect, but her thesis came from really taking the promise of perfect unity seriously.</p>
<p class="indent">Interesting, but understandable, that the woman could imagine individuals and community only being in odds with one another, even in eternity. The doctrine of the Trinity, as we have been saying, gives another option. Somehow—we claim and we hope, when we confess the three in one—we individuals will no longer conflict with the unity that is the communion of saints. Yes, we will recognize one another. But our distinctions will only strengthen our connections, and our unity will only celebrate our distinctions. Now, that idea is truly scandalous!</p>
<h3 class="h2">J<small class="calibre3">OINING THE</small> D<small class="calibre3">ANCE</small>: T<small class="calibre3">HE</small> T<small class="calibre3">RINITY AND</small> C<small class="calibre3">HRISTIAN</small> C<small class="calibre3">OMMUNITY</small></h3>
<p class="indent">Another way of getting at the “so what” of the doctrine of the Trinity is by way of a concept developed in the course of Christian believers trying to work out how, exactly, God can be three and one at the same time. The concept is <em class="calibre8">perichoresis</em>, a Greek term that is hard to decipher. While it is agreed upon that <em class="calibre8">peri</em> means “around,” scholars disagree about which root grounds <em class="calibre8">choresis</em>. Is it <em class="calibre8">chorein</em>, which means something along the lines of “make room for”? Or is it <em class="calibre8">choros</em>, which means “dance”? Wrestling with these possibilities, <em class="calibre8">perichoresis</em> has been translated, variously, as “interpenetration,” “mutual indwelling,” and “dancing around.” Given its unusual structure and infrequent appearance in the literature, at least one scholar has hypothesized that the word was developed as a technical term that we can better understand by attending to its usage than by analyzing its etymology.<a id="rch4en48" class="calibre7"></a><sup class="calibre12"><a href="notes.xhtml#ch4en48" class="calibre5">48</a></sup> What we do know is that <em class="calibre8">perichoresis</em> was used, during and after the debates at Chalcedon, to describe the relationship of Jesus Christ’s two natures. As we discussed in the last chapter, since the concern was to speak of the natures as at once both inextricably intertwined and at the same <a id="page_133" class="calibre7"></a>time distinct from one another, it might be safe to say that the intention of those developing the word was to aim for both unity and distinction, oneness and distinction, participation <em class="calibre8">with</em> individualization.<a id="rch4en49" class="calibre7"></a><sup class="calibre12"><a href="notes.xhtml#ch4en49" class="calibre5">49</a></sup></p>
<p class="indent">Mutual indwelling, understood with this dialectic between individualization and participation in mind, would be about sharing life, together, as distinct individuals. Sometimes, when I think of mutual indwelling, I picture translucent circles, each a primary color, overlapping one another. The red circle is always red, but when it is placed over the yellow color (which always stays yellow) it, in a sense, “indwells” the yellow insofar as the two, together, are orange. Another way of putting it, playing off another common way of understanding <em class="calibre8">perichoresis</em>, is to say the red makes room for yellow and the yellow makes room for the red. Similarly, of course, mutual indwelling is imagined as the red and blue share life together as purple, while still remaining red and blue (for example). And when and where all three together overlap<a id="rch4en50" class="calibre7"></a><sup class="calibre12"><a href="notes.xhtml#ch4en50" class="calibre5">50</a></sup> there is seen either white or black (depending on when the three colors are mixed by way of “additive” or “subtractive” color).</p>
<p class="indent">A very different example that comes to mind, when I think of mutual indwelling, is something my father used to say. He used to tell my two brothers and me, especially around the time when we were teenagers, that he always had the activities and schedules of the other members of our family playing in his head as he went through his own day. “I’m always thinking,” he would say, “here’s what your mother is dealing with right now; and this is the time of Cindy’s math test, and I hope Scott is feeling better, and I hope Mark is having a good day.” My dad often spoke, along these lines, of “little TV sets he had,” each with one of us featured, in the background of everything else he was doing. “I never turn them off,” he used to tell us. “You and what you are doing are always with me. I am always tuned into your channel. I am thinking about you very consciously and praying for your life.”</p>
<p class="indent">There is a downside of any analogy to a mystery, and the downside of the TV set analogy I have drawn from what my dad used to say, as strong as it is in other ways, is that it does not capture the dynamic movement between the persons of the Trinity. This might be a weakness of the mutual <a id="page_134" class="calibre7"></a>indwelling model in general, by the way: it seems a bit static. The fact is, the Father, Son, and Spirit do not simply remember one another, or have one another in mind, or even overlap one another’s lives (as the colors might). They actually work and act together.</p>
<p class="indent">Barth makes something of this when he argues that the triune persons who indwell one another perichoretically also actively <em class="calibre8">fellowship</em> with one another and participate in <em class="calibre8">partnership</em> with one another.<a id="rch4en51" class="calibre7"></a><sup class="calibre12"><a href="notes.xhtml#ch4en51" class="calibre5">51</a></sup> Because they are each distinct, they do more than make space for one another, the way members of a commune share common space. Rather, they share who they are and what they have to offer as distinct members of the community in ways that are reciprocally beneficial. I think, when I imagine the fellowship of the triune life, of a family in which members know one another’s stories so well that the story of each one becomes the story of every one. The Son, I imagine, brings to the table (so to speak), his experiences of life on this earth, of the faithful disciples he meets along the way, of his suffering in the Garden and on the cross. The Father brings to the fellowship the experience of his grief, on the occasion of his beloved Son becoming sin so that we might become the righteousness of God. And the Spirit brings her story of enlivening Jesus throughout his life, first by “coming upon” Mary who then conceived, then also by driving Jesus into the wilderness and guiding his prophesying that he had “come to set the captives free,”<a id="rch4en52" class="calibre7"></a><sup class="calibre12"><a href="notes.xhtml#ch4en52" class="calibre5">52</a></sup> and then finally by coming to comfort those who are grieving, and to empower the church to continue in ministry. Like a family telling stories around a shared meal, I imagine each of the three persons of the Trinity telling distinctive stories about the crucifixion (for example) in ways that are really the telling of a shared story.</p>
<p class="indent">One more imagining of how God’s intra-trinitarian fellowship might look could center on the story of the creation. The Father might speak, at the table, from the vantage point of Creator, remembering the joy of creating all things good, rehearsing the created harmonies between God and humanity, between nature and humanity, between Adam and Eve. The Son might remind the household of God of the central role of the spoken word to the creation itself. With words the Creator said, “Let there be light!” and there was light. And the Spirit might tag onto the story of <a id="page_135" class="calibre7"></a>the Son, reminding him that the Word was present, in the beginning, as Wisdom—present before anything that was made was made, working alongside the Creator, “rejoicing and delighting in the human race.”<a id="rch4en53" class="calibre7"></a><sup class="calibre12"><a href="notes.xhtml#ch4en53" class="calibre5">53</a></sup></p>
<p class="indent">This idea that Father, Son, and Spirit share in fellowship, and that this fellowship honors both the distinctiveness of the three and the unity of the persons, extends, then, into the activities of ongoing partnership. It is not only, in other words, that we should imagine the three sitting around a table reminiscing about the past. Rather, God is engaged, together in God’s own trinitarian self, in God’s work in the world—bringing God’s Kingdom to earth, as it is in heaven. Perhaps, around whatever table there is, there is some current planning going on. How will we arrive at all tears being wiped away? And wolves and lambs lying down together? And no one being left behind?<a id="rch4en54" class="calibre7"></a><sup class="calibre12"><a href="notes.xhtml#ch4en54" class="calibre5">54</a></sup></p>
<p class="indent">It is in relation to the life of the triune God being a partnership that the metaphor of the dance seems particularly apropos. I used to have a t-shirt, when I was a kid, that said: “God is not finished with me yet.” That is certainly right—and also incredibly hopeful, when you think about it, in the face of naysayers who insist “people never change” or “that’s just the way the world is,” as if we shouldn’t even bother imagining how things could be better. The Christian claim is that, even in the face of our less-than-perfect world and less-than-perfect history, the dance of the triune God continues. In partnership with one another, Father, Son, and Holy Spirit continue the creative work they celebrate in their fellowship—their work of ongoing creation, yet-to-be completed redemption, and faithful, 24/7 intercession. The God who made us did not leave us to then manage on our own, but gives us our breath and our life, new again every moment. The dance goes on; creation continues. The God who redeemed us continues working to “conform us to the image of the Son”<a id="rch4en55" class="calibre7"></a><sup class="calibre12"><a href="notes.xhtml#ch4en55" class="calibre5">55</a></sup>—a spiritual process often known as <em class="calibre8">sanctification</em>. The dance goes on; creation groans; we are one step closer to the mending of the world. The God who comforts us is not a kind of security blanket that operates, as expected, whenever we have need. Rather, God as Comforter, dancing around in shared life and partnership with God the Creator and God the Redeemer, goads us out of comfort zones that perpetuate the discomfort of our brokenness, <a id="page_136" class="calibre7"></a>and into new life. The dance goes on; creation is remade; there is new heaven, new earth, new us. We are still three and distinct, particular and precious; we are also one and united, mutually indwelling and whole. We are, in the dynamic, buzzing, moving actions of the dancing, triune God, completely and totally claimed and included. Like it or not, we are swept up. Like it or not, we are caught in an unconditional love that will eventually of course be about forgiving our sins and omissions but is now, and first, and even more primally, about laying claim to us as participants, as members of the household, as beloved ones, as children, as sons and daughters who are brothers and sisters of the child who is Christ. We are the adopted children who are chosen and brought home, who are made fellow heirs, who are given a key—and all before any frank conversation about sin or repentance, about gratitude or responsibility. We are brought into the dance not by a God who has acted benevolently and who is now giving us the opportunity to respond in kind, though in lesser degree. On the contrary, we are brought into the dance by the God who <em class="calibre8">is</em> love, the triune God who, in claiming, capturing, and dancing with us, is being exactly who God is.</p>
<p class="indent">As Father, Son, and Spirit indwell one another’s lives and actions, sharing in fellowship and joining in ongoing partnership, so we who are claimed by the triune God of love are free to indwell the lives of others, entering into fellowship and partnership relationships with them.</p>
<p class="indent">We will return to considering the shape of our life together with others, as it reflects the image of the triune God, when we consider the doctrines of the church and Christian life (part four) and when we consider what we are called to hope for and to do, in this world (part five). But before we move on to thinking about how the lives and work of people of faith might look, as they dance together in the household of God, it is important to flesh out, a bit more, the narrative that is the story of our faith, and that helps us make sense of who we are not only in relation to God, but in relation to the historical conditions in which we find ourselves—the circumstances in which we live. The fact is that something has gone awry with the beautiful image of us dancing with the God who is love. How do we understand this, theologically, and what do we do about it as <a id="page_137" class="calibre7"></a>we consider how to form our daily lives, fellowships, and partnerships? We began this book, in the first part, by thinking through how we can possibly say words about the God who is infinite, and where we can go to find the right kinds of ideas and words to work with. In this part we have said a good many words about God, asserting that God meets us in and through the incarnation and claims us as the God who is three-in-one and one-in-three. In the next section, we will consider how the God who meets us continues to make us, even in the face of the very real problem of sin.</p>
</body>
</html>
