<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>Holding Faith</title>
    <meta content="urn:uuid:e0000000-0000-0000-0000-000004415877" name="Adept.expected.resource"/>
    <meta http-equiv="Content-Type" content="text/html; charset=utf-8"/>
  <link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="../../stylesheet.css"/>
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="../../page_styles.css"/>
</head>
  <body class="calibre">
<h2 class="h1"><a id="page_2" class="calibre5"></a><a id="page_3" class="calibre5"></a><a id="ch1" class="calibre5"></a>Chapter One</h2>
<h2 class="h2a">H<small class="calibre11">OW</small> C<small class="calibre11">AN</small> W<small class="calibre11">E</small> S<small class="calibre11">PEAK OF</small> G<small class="calibre11">OD</small>?</h2>
<h3 class="h3x"><a id="ch1lev1" class="calibre5"></a><em class="calibre13">The Doctrine of Revelation</em></h3>
<h3 class="h3a">T<small class="calibre3">HE</small> M<small class="calibre3">AGNITUDE OF</small> G<small class="calibre3">OD</small></h3>
<p class="noindent">The first and enduring challenge of theology is that our subject matter—God—is greater than any of us can comprehend. In other words, no matter how big we think about God, God is bigger than that. If we box God in, in the way we think about God, God is bigger than that. But if we proudly boast that we believe in a God who is outside the box—God is bigger than that, still! The Bible testifies it is <em class="calibre8">what God doe</em>s, as well as <em class="calibre8">who God is</em>, that is beyond our best understandings. Paul puts this beautifully when he marvels that God is able to do “far beyond all that we could ask or imagine.”<a id="rch1en1" class="calibre7"></a><sup class="calibre12"><a href="notes.xhtml#ch1en1" class="calibre5">1</a></sup> This doesn’t mean that we don’t know anything about God, or that we can never say for sure what God is up to. But it does mean that there is always more that we <em class="calibre8">don’t</em> know—even about the things we do know about! When we say God loves us, for example, we can say this with confidence even while realizing God’s love is “wider, deeper, and <a id="page_4" class="calibre7"></a>higher”<a id="rch1en2" class="calibre7"></a><sup class="calibre12"><a href="notes.xhtml#ch1en2" class="calibre5">2</a></sup> than we will ever completely understand, no matter how much we manage to grow into it.</p>
<p class="indent">The more we learn about God, then, the more we come to gain insight into God’s unknowability. One of the scenes in literature that reminds me of this is in C. S. Lewis’s story of Narnia, when the resurrected Aslan (the Christ figure, depicted as a lion) wakes up the girl Lucy (his disciple) by touching his tongue to her nose. “Aslan,” Lucy exclaims, “you’re bigger.” Aslan explains to Lucy that he has always been that size, but that her perception of his magnitude will grow with every year she does.<a id="rch1en3" class="calibre7"></a><sup class="calibre12"><a href="notes.xhtml#ch1en3" class="calibre5">3</a></sup></p>
<p class="indent">This idea that the more we know, the more we realize we don’t know is of course applicable to more than just the field of theology. I have friends who are scientists who almost seem to take joy in what they <em class="calibre8">don’t</em> know, reveling in their awareness that the cosmos seems to be composed of an infinite number of universes or that separated molecular particles appear to relate to one another even when they have been separated by miles.<a id="rch1en4" class="calibre7"></a><sup class="calibre12"><a href="notes.xhtml#ch1en4" class="calibre5">4</a></sup> Our son has a T-shirt with a picture of a sweep of stars and planets on it, an arrow pointing to one small spark with the message “You are here.” This shirt’s message is clever because it highlights our relative ignorance by invoking our knowledge not of what we know but of what we do not know.<a id="rch1en5" class="calibre7"></a><sup class="calibre12"><a href="notes.xhtml#ch1en5" class="calibre5">5</a></sup> In other words, it admits we do not know everything even as it brags about knowing that we do not know everything.</p>
<p class="indent">Despite our awareness of our relative ignorance, however, we in twenty-first-century American culture continue to place a high value on gaining mastery of subjects, developing skill sets we can use in order to produce and contribute. For this reason, the idea that God will seem even <em class="calibre8">less</em> manageable the more we study, reflect, and contemplate can seem a bit pointless, when it comes to engaging the task of theology.</p>
<p class="indent">I have a story that reminds me of this. The first day I was in college, I sat down in the cafeteria next to a fellow student who was clearly younger than me. As I recall, he boasted that he was part of a special program sponsored by a high-powered university that was studying how high-IQ teenagers would do in college if they went to college early. I tried not to be intimidated, at my ripe old age of eighteen, with this peer who was fifteen. “What do you want to major in?” he asked me.</p>
<p class="indent"><a id="page_5" class="calibre7"></a>“I want to study psychology,” I said. “I’m really interested in knowing how human beings work.”</p>
<p class="indent">“Why in the world would you want to study psychology?” he asked. “I wouldn’t want to do that. . . . It would be impossible to learn everything there is to know. Human beings are just too complicated,” he added.</p>
<p class="indent">“Well, what do <em class="calibre8">you</em> want to study?” I asked him.</p>
<p class="indent">“I want to study <em class="calibre8">bacteria</em>,” he answered. “Bacteria is something I can master,” he explained. “I’m going to learn everything there is to know about bacteria.”</p>
<p class="indent">It wouldn’t surprise me to find that this fellow college student is, today, one of the world’s leading experts on bacteria. And, if he is, I am betting he would now laugh at his old assertion that he could eventually come to know everything there is to know about it. Surely, any biologist would argue that the world of bacteria is greater than any of us can see; that it is a mysterious world whose boundaries keep expanding with every bit of information we gain. If this is true of the world of bacteria—a person of faith would have to ask—how much more true must it be of the universe of God in which bacteria occupy only one small sphere?</p>
<h3 class="h2">T<small class="calibre3">HE</small> D<small class="calibre3">RIVE TO</small> K<small class="calibre3">NOW AND THE</small> R<small class="calibre3">ISK OF</small> K<small class="calibre3">NOWLEDGE</small></h3>
<p class="indent">One answer to why we should continue seeking to know that which appears to be beyond us, commonly found in popular culture, is that we have a much greater capacity to know things than we are aware. Often, statistics are given about what percentage of our brains we actually use. For years we were told that we use about 10 percent of our brain power.<a id="rch1en6" class="calibre7"></a><sup class="calibre12"><a href="notes.xhtml#ch1en6" class="calibre5">6</a></sup> This is a popular fiction, of course, but what would happen—articles, movies, and books ask us—if we used the full 100 percent? We would be able to do anything! We would be able to know everything! We would be able to change the world! Or would we?</p>
<p class="indent"><a id="page_6" class="calibre7"></a>This idea that we can know more, and thereby improve our lives, is certainly not new. Human beings since the time of Eve and Adam have been driven by curiosity. We want to know things. And we want, at best, to improve things by applying what we know to what we do. Coupled with our conviction that it is always possible to know more is a great deal of anxiety about whether we will use our knowledge for good or for ill. We are anxious for good reason—when we take a hard look at history, it is unclear whether knowledge is more often capaciously shared in the interest of the good or leveraged harmfully to gain power, wealth, or prestige.</p>
<p class="indent">This tension between <em class="calibre8">reaching to embrace knowledge</em> and <em class="calibre8">fearing what knowing too much might lead to</em> has been explored in many popular films and television shows in the United States over the last three decades. In the next several paragraphs I will survey how a few of these have reflected on what American culture thinks human beings can know and not know, and when knowledge is useful and when it is dangerous. Understanding how our culture thinks about <em class="calibre8">epistemology</em>, or how we come to know, will help us make better sense of how we approach the knowledge of God.<a id="rch1en7" class="calibre7"></a><sup class="calibre12"><a href="notes.xhtml#ch1en7" class="calibre5">7</a></sup></p>
<p class="indent">The downside both of knowing too much while also not knowing enough is well depicted in the 2014 film <em class="calibre8">Lucy</em>. In this film, the protagonist gains in her capacity to use brainpower to the point of her self-dissolving into a kind of cosmic oneness. In contrast to many others in history (not to mention other characters in the movie), she uses her increasing knowledge only to identify the good and promote it; only to isolate what is wrong and fight against it. Tellingly, the story of the movie argues that harboring an ever-increasing capacity for knowledge is unsustainable. There is only so much human creatures can bear. Only so much knowledge, only so much awareness of suffering, only so much perception of beauty. Knowing too much, too fast, will likely destroy us.<a id="rch1en8" class="calibre7"></a><sup class="calibre12"><a href="notes.xhtml#ch1en8" class="calibre5">8</a></sup></p>
<p class="indent">A 1997 movie titled <em class="calibre8">The Fifth Element</em> had earlier played on this theme. In it, a knowledge-absorbing being named LeeLoo becomes so distraught by the history of violence in this world, so overwhelmed by the magnitude of its beauty, that she begins to get incapacitating headaches. Even she—an alien unrestrained by many of the limitations of human <a id="page_7" class="calibre7"></a>creatures—cannot sustain such an expansive capacity for knowledge, especially knowledge of life and death.<a id="rch1en9" class="calibre7"></a><sup class="calibre12"><a href="notes.xhtml#ch1en9" class="calibre5">9</a></sup></p>
<p class="indent">There are scores of science-fiction stories, movies, and television shows leading up to the era of being concerned with what will happen if we gain <em class="calibre8">too</em> much knowledge that play with this theme of how we need to respect the vastness of what we are exploring, taking into account our limited capacities to absorb it all. Science fiction of the 1950s and 1960s aimed, along these lines: (1) to recognize the limits of human knowledge; (2) to encourage humans to participate in knowledge bases bigger than themselves; and (3) to reassure humans that there are safeguards to the risks of pursuing knowledge that is beyond human capacities. Sometimes science fiction stories of this era created certain rules that set perimeters in which explorations and pursuit of knowledge can more safely thrive.<a id="rch1en10" class="calibre7"></a><sup class="calibre12"><a href="notes.xhtml#ch1en10" class="calibre5">10</a></sup> The science-fiction writer Isaac Asimov, for example, in 1950 created “The Three Laws of Robotics” intended to protect human beings even when they create technologies that can potentially outdo them.<a id="rch1en11" class="calibre7"></a><sup class="calibre12"><a href="notes.xhtml#ch1en11" class="calibre5">11</a></sup> Another strategy for encouraging humans to continue their pursuits emphasizes that humans are not the only ones who are limited—artificial intelligences have their failings too. In <em class="calibre8">2001: A Space Odyssey</em> (1968), audiences are simultaneously both reassured and disturbed by the discovery that the sentient computer Hal does not necessarily have better answers than do the human space explorers. Sometimes, as it turns out, Hal is just plain wrong and—even worse—murderous.<a id="rch1en12" class="calibre7"></a><sup class="calibre12"><a href="notes.xhtml#ch1en12" class="calibre5">12</a></sup> The reassuring message of the movie is that perhaps there is some place for us humans, after all.</p>
<p class="indent">From the 1970s to the 1990s there seems to have been less emphasis on trying to outmaneuver the admitted limits of human knowledge and more on seeking to experience what cannot be cognitively understood. Classic movies suggesting we allow ourselves to be vulnerable to the beauty and wisdom of what and whom we <em class="calibre8">don’t</em> know include <em class="calibre8">Close Encounters of the Third Kind</em> (1977),<a id="rch1en13" class="calibre7"></a><sup class="calibre12"><a href="notes.xhtml#ch1en13" class="calibre5">13</a></sup> <em class="calibre8">E.T</em>. (1982),<a id="rch1en14" class="calibre7"></a><sup class="calibre12"><a href="notes.xhtml#ch1en14" class="calibre5">14</a></sup> and <em class="calibre8">Contact</em> (1997).<a id="rch1en15" class="calibre7"></a><sup class="calibre12"><a href="notes.xhtml#ch1en15" class="calibre5">15</a></sup> Luke Skywalker, in <em class="calibre8">Star Wars: Episode IV</em> (1977), destroys the Death Star by making the needed shot without looking into his targeting computer. In order to do this, he leans into mystery he has experienced: mystery he has been trained to respect, engage, and—even—submit to.<a id="rch1en16" class="calibre7"></a><sup class="calibre12"><a href="notes.xhtml#ch1en16" class="calibre5">16</a></sup> His actions are shaped not only by what <a id="page_8" class="calibre7"></a>he knows, but also by what he knows he doesn’t completely understand. He allows himself to trust “the Force.”<a id="rch1en17" class="calibre7"></a><sup class="calibre12"><a href="notes.xhtml#ch1en17" class="calibre5">17</a></sup> But he doesn’t trust blindly. He and the mentors with whom he is in relationship have had enough experience of the Force and enough training in its ways that Luke knows how to use it, even if he doesn’t understand it. Jean Luc Picard, in the television series <em class="calibre8">Star Trek: The Next Generation</em> (1987–1994), presses on with his space explorations even though he recognizes there are myriad unknowns he and his crew will be called upon to navigate. He audaciously makes decisions and orders his staff to “make it so” even while knowing perfectly well he is operating with knowledge that falls far short of the total picture. He nonetheless believes his limited knowledge is worth something. (Often it is worth more, even, than the omnipotent, omniscient knowledge of a regular guest character on the series, Q). Picard seems to trust that the cosmos, for all its ambiguities, will honor his efforts as long as he follows the “prime directive,”<a id="rch1en18" class="calibre7"></a><sup class="calibre12"><a href="notes.xhtml#ch1en18" class="calibre5">18</a></sup> respecting the knowledge and experience of others.</p>
<p class="indent">If I were to go further in analyzing our cultural context and how it both reflects and shapes our understanding of how we should relate to that which we do not know, I might mention that I see a range of possible strategies in the movies I watch with our kids. The Harry Potter series, for example, clearly emphasizes, as Star Wars and Star Trek do, taking the risk of participating in mysteries beyond our understanding. The series shows that avoiding that which cannot be understood is, actually, stupid—consider the mockery made of Harry’s uncle, aunt, and cousin Dudley, when they try to ignore the fact that Harry has magical powers.<a id="rch1en19" class="calibre7"></a><sup class="calibre12"><a href="notes.xhtml#ch1en19" class="calibre5">19</a></sup> But then there is also the animated movie <em class="calibre8">Monsters vs. Aliens</em>,<a id="rch1en20" class="calibre7"></a><sup class="calibre12"><a href="notes.xhtml#ch1en20" class="calibre5">20</a></sup> which includes a satirical scene in which General Warren Monger greets the alien spaceship by optimistically playing (on his portable electric piano) the five-note sequence that worked to establish relationship between human beings and their alien visitors in <em class="calibre8">Close Encounters of the Third Kind</em>. The aliens in <em class="calibre8">Monsters</em> respond by attacking, which just goes to show you: you can’t always trust what you don’t know. But sometimes you can, the movie insists. Sometimes you have to trust the mysterious, good monsters to help you conquer the evil aliens.</p>
<p class="indent">The last few paragraphs have reflected on how recent movies have played with themes of knowledge and mystery as a way into considering <a id="page_9" class="calibre7"></a>how we, in American culture, relate to what we do not fully understand, and perhaps will never understand. Maybe you have been reflecting, as you have read the last few pages, on which movies you like best or which characters you most resonate with. Perhaps you identify with certain characters more than others—maybe you would align yourself more with the skeptical but curious Jodie Foster character (Ellie) from the earlier part of <em class="calibre8">Contact</em>; or maybe you are wired more like the little boy Elliott, from <em class="calibre8">E.T</em>.—a character who has no hesitation investing his entire self in that which he cannot understand. Before we move to more explicit discussion of how we can speak about the God who is greater than any and all words, it might be helpful to pause, for a few moments, and reflect on how we tend to think about relating to that which cannot be understood, more generally. I have included some suggested reflection questions in the box below, if you would like to engage them.</p>
<div class="box">
<p class="boxhead">YOU MIGHT WANT TO ASK YOURSELF . . .</p>
<p class="boxdash">- Do you tend to <em class="calibre8">resist</em> things that are mysterious, finding ways to ignore them or work around them (maybe like a nicer Uncle Vernon, in <em class="calibre8">Harry Potter</em>, or Elliott’s mom, for most of <em class="calibre8">E.T</em>.)? If you do, is it because you find them to be inconvenient, silly, scary, too awesome to think they could possibly have anything to do with you, and/or too risky? Or is it for some other reason you can name? - OR -</p>
<p class="boxdasht">- Do you tend to <em class="calibre8">accept</em> that some things are mysterious but try to respect them from a distance, recognizing your helplessness in relationship to that which is beyond your understanding (maybe more like the earlier Hans Solo, from <em class="calibre8">Star Wars</em>, who recognizes the Force and its implications but tries to keep from getting too involved)? - OR -</p>
<p class="boxdasht">- Do you tend to look for ways to <em class="calibre8">plunge into</em> mysteries, even when you are aware you will never completely understand them (like the kids in <em class="calibre8">E.T</em>., Ellie [at least eventually!] in <em class="calibre8">Contact</em>, or Luke Skywalker in <em class="calibre8">Star Wars</em>)? If so, how do you go about doing so? Through listening to music, doing some kind of art, talking with your friends, doing yoga, attending different kinds of worship services?</p>
</div>
<p class="indent"><a id="page_10" class="calibre7"></a>Although theology takes into account all of these responses to mystery, it is especially invested in the third—the actual plunging into the mysteries. Jesus’s hope, clearly, is that we will participate in that which is greater than ourselves. This is why he is always encouraging people to follow him,<a id="rch1en21" class="calibre7"></a><sup class="calibre12"><a href="notes.xhtml#ch1en21" class="calibre5">21</a></sup> to sin no more,<a id="rch1en22" class="calibre7"></a><sup class="calibre12"><a href="notes.xhtml#ch1en22" class="calibre5">22</a></sup> to drink living water,<a id="rch1en23" class="calibre7"></a><sup class="calibre12"><a href="notes.xhtml#ch1en23" class="calibre5">23</a></sup> to be born again,<a id="rch1en24" class="calibre7"></a><sup class="calibre12"><a href="notes.xhtml#ch1en24" class="calibre5">24</a></sup> to show hospitality to those who cannot repay it,<a id="rch1en25" class="calibre7"></a><sup class="calibre12"><a href="notes.xhtml#ch1en25" class="calibre5">25</a></sup> or to share the good news.<a id="rch1en26" class="calibre7"></a><sup class="calibre12"><a href="notes.xhtml#ch1en26" class="calibre5">26</a></sup> This is why he invites Peter to the transfiguration,<a id="rch1en27" class="calibre7"></a><sup class="calibre12"><a href="notes.xhtml#ch1en27" class="calibre5">27</a></sup> and tells Mary she has chosen “what is better” when she takes a break from her chores to listen to his teaching,<a id="rch1en28" class="calibre7"></a><sup class="calibre12"><a href="notes.xhtml#ch1en28" class="calibre5">28</a></sup> and instructs the disciples to “abide” in him as branches abide in a vine.<a id="rch1en29" class="calibre7"></a><sup class="calibre12"><a href="notes.xhtml#ch1en29" class="calibre5">29</a></sup> Jesus knows and teaches that knowledge of God is not primarily something that is acquired in exchange for our hard work, or sacrifice, or good intentions. It is, rather, something that is experienced when we risk recognizing that we are in relationship with the God who is beyond our knowledge. It is then, and only then, that we know the very God who at the same time remains beyond our capacity to know.</p>
<p class="indent">I realize this way of thinking might sound like a mere word game after a while and for this reason might become frustrating for those who are genuinely interested in knowing God. What kind of sense does it make to talk of being in relationship to One who will remain ever mysterious? What would it actually look like to move from here to there? On what basis would we go about actively taking such a risk? Why would we not assume that the chasm between ourselves and the unknowable God is too great to be crossed, focusing our attention on what <em class="calibre8">can</em> be known, instead? In short, on what basis <em class="calibre8">can</em> we know the unknowable God?</p>
<p class="indent">The simple, though not simplistic, answer to this is: because the one who is unknowable has shared God’s own self with us.</p>
<h3 class="h2">H<small class="calibre3">OW</small> W<small class="calibre3">E</small> K<small class="calibre3">NOW THE</small> U<small class="calibre3">NKNOWABLE</small></h3>
<p class="indent">As mentioned in the introduction, Augustine famously reminds us that we can never gain exhaustive knowledge. “If you understood,” he says, “it would not be God.”<a id="rch1en30" class="calibre7"></a><sup class="calibre12"><a href="notes.xhtml#ch1en30" class="calibre5">30</a></sup> But he at the same time also testifies that <a id="page_11" class="calibre7"></a>the God who is beyond our understanding ceaselessly pursues relationship with us. The story of Augustine’s own coming to faith, found in his <em class="calibre8">Confessions</em>,<a id="rch1en31" class="calibre7"></a><sup class="calibre12"><a href="notes.xhtml#ch1en31" class="calibre5">31</a></sup> describes in many beautiful, compelling, and (at times) even exasperating ways how he comes to the awareness that the God whose power and majesty is beyond all comprehension meets every individual one of us with love and concern. “O thou Omnipotent Good,” he exclaims, “thou carest for every one of us as if thou didst care for him [or her] only, and so for all as if they were but one.”<a id="rch1en32" class="calibre7"></a><sup class="calibre12"><a href="notes.xhtml#ch1en32" class="calibre5">32</a></sup> Augustine knows the unknowable God not because he somehow musters the wherewithal for such knowing, but because this God in some way reaches out and claims him.</p>
<p class="indent">Augustine would remind us that, if we in all humility confess only that we <em class="calibre8">cannot</em> know God, we have been inattentive to the most wondrous fact of all—that the God who is unknowable has chosen to know us. Christians, of course, center this claim in God’s self-revelation in Jesus Christ. But sometimes we inadvertently talk about Jesus as though he somehow corrects some sort of problem in God. As we will reiterate when we discuss the Trinity and the incarnation in later chapters, Jesus does not compensate for God’s otherwise aloof and seemingly unloving character, nor does he bridge any sort of gap or chasm between us and God. Rather, Jesus reveals who God is, was, and always will be. And who this God is can be seen not only in the central event of Jesus Christ, but wherever and however God has acted in creaturely history—in God’s creation of the world, in God’s calling of Israel, in God’s enlivening the church by the power of the Holy Spirit.</p>
<p class="indent">Who God is and what God does may be “beyond anything we could ask or imagine” in the sense that we can never know, understand, or explain everything about God.<a id="rch1en33" class="calibre7"></a><sup class="calibre12"><a href="notes.xhtml#ch1en33" class="calibre5">33</a></sup> But because God is self-revealed, there are many, many <em class="calibre8">true</em> things we <em class="calibre8">can</em> say about God. Again, we can say things that can be trusted—and even that we can build our lives upon—about who God is and what God does. We can share, preach, teach, and live these things even though our understandings and testimony can never exhaust who God is and what God does.</p>
<p class="indent">One of the first and foremost things we can say about the God who reaches out to us is that this God has not left us behind. God is not, as the <a id="page_12" class="calibre7"></a>song says, “watching us . . . from a distance.”<a id="rch1en34" class="calibre7"></a><sup class="calibre12"><a href="notes.xhtml#ch1en34" class="calibre5">34</a></sup> On the contrary, the divine self-disclosure itself testifies to God’s unmitigated and often unnerving presence with us. As the psalmist who wrote Psalm 139 marvels, in prayer to God: “If I went up to heaven, you would be there. If I went down to the grave, you would be there too! If I could fly on the wings of dawn, stopping to rest only on the far side of the ocean—even there your hand would guide me; even there your strong hand would hold me tight!”<a id="rch1en35" class="calibre7"></a><sup class="calibre12"><a href="notes.xhtml#ch1en35" class="calibre5">35</a></sup> What amazes the psalmist is not only that God is in all places at once, and therefore cannot be escaped. What amazes her<a id="rch1en36" class="calibre7"></a><sup class="calibre12"><a href="notes.xhtml#ch1en36" class="calibre5">36</a></sup> is that this God who is all-in-all is radically present with us in our particular lives and circumstances. “You knit me together while I was still in my mother’s womb,” she says. “On your scroll every day was written that was being formed for me.”<a id="rch1en37" class="calibre7"></a><sup class="calibre12"><a href="notes.xhtml#ch1en37" class="calibre5">37</a></sup> The God who is everywhere present is not present <em class="calibre8">in general</em> or <em class="calibre8">as an observer only</em>. The God who is everywhere present is the hands-on fashioner of each and every person, invested in each and every one of our days.<a id="rch1en38" class="calibre7"></a><sup class="calibre12"><a href="notes.xhtml#ch1en38" class="calibre5">38</a></sup> The psalmist clearly believes this reality is awesome:<a id="rch1en39" class="calibre7"></a><sup class="calibre12"><a href="notes.xhtml#ch1en39" class="calibre5">39</a></sup> “That kind of knowledge is too much for me,” she says, “it’s so high above me that I can’t fathom it.”<a id="rch1en40" class="calibre7"></a><sup class="calibre12"><a href="notes.xhtml#ch1en40" class="calibre5">40</a></sup></p>
<p class="indent">Notice that the psalmist <em class="calibre8">knows</em> she cannot get her mind wholly around the mystery that the God who is all-in-all knows and cares for every detail about us. Like Lucy encountering the resurrected Aslan, her knowing of the God who knows her includes a deepening awareness of God’s magnitude. And the deepening awareness of God’s magnitude somehow and in turn seems to remind her that God has called <em class="calibre8">her</em> by name—her, as a particular individual. This flies in the face of what we might associate with emphasis on the divine mystery. Why would a God who is all-powerful care about every sparrow that falls to the ground?<a id="rch1en41" class="calibre7"></a><sup class="calibre12"><a href="notes.xhtml#ch1en41" class="calibre5">41</a></sup> Why would a God who is “mighty in power” insist that “not one is missing”;<a id="rch1en42" class="calibre7"></a><sup class="calibre12"><a href="notes.xhtml#ch1en42" class="calibre5">42</a></sup> that <em class="calibre8">every</em> knee bow and <em class="calibre8">every</em> tongue confess?<a id="rch1en43" class="calibre7"></a><sup class="calibre12"><a href="notes.xhtml#ch1en43" class="calibre5">43</a></sup> Why would a God who is surrounded by a crowd of admirers stop and search for a single hemorrhaging woman, asking, “Who touched me?”<a id="rch1en44" class="calibre7"></a><sup class="calibre12"><a href="notes.xhtml#ch1en44" class="calibre5">44</a></sup> As Marilynne Robinson has recently put it, reveling in Calvin’s take on precisely this mystery, “It is as if we were to propose . . . that that great energy only exists to make possible our miraculously delicate participation in it.”<a id="rch1en45" class="calibre7"></a><sup class="calibre12"><a href="notes.xhtml#ch1en45" class="calibre5">45</a></sup></p>
<p class="indent"><a id="page_13" class="calibre7"></a>These testimonies to how the Almighty God reaches out to particular and beloved ones—offered by a range of people of faith including Augustine, the psalmists, the Gospel writers, Paul, Calvin, and Robinson—all press us to recognize that the magnificent, mysterious God who will never be fully known or managed by us also insists on meddling with us: loving us, claiming us, and trying to influence how we think of our own value and the value of our days.</p>
<p class="indent">It should be noticed that the path to knowing the unknowable I am recommending here does not lean first and foremost on offering proofs of God’s existence or defenses of God’s character, as worthy as such enterprises can be, when engaged from the vantage point of faith.<a id="rch1en46" class="calibre7"></a><sup class="calibre12"><a href="notes.xhtml#ch1en46" class="calibre5">46</a></sup> I am also not suggesting that seekers of faith should master the right balance of spiritual practices, or achieve perfect sincerity, or learn to let go of their fears, as if any of these things were a requirement for knowing the God who has met us as we are. From the vantage point of grace, the only thing recipients can really <em class="calibre8">do</em> is realize they cannot do anything at all to achieve it. And even that insight itself, we would do well to conclude, is a gift of God.</p>
<p class="indent">Admitting our incapacity to gain what matters most may be, for many of us, somewhat aggravating. This is entirely understandable, given the nature of the water we swim in in twenty-first-century American culture. We have been shaped, after all, in a context that tells us we <em class="calibre8">can</em> “make it so”—even when it seems unrealistic to think we can do so.<a id="rch1en47" class="calibre7"></a><sup class="calibre12"><a href="notes.xhtml#ch1en47" class="calibre5">47</a></sup> Spock is always telling Captain Kirk, for example, that the “statistical likelihood” the crew members of the USS <em class="calibre8">Enterprise</em> will succeed in its current mission is something less than 5 percent.<a id="rch1en48" class="calibre7"></a><sup class="calibre12"><a href="notes.xhtml#ch1en48" class="calibre5">48</a></sup> But then they always do, despite the odds. The little engine says, “I think I can, I think I can, I think I can.” Her wherewithal pays off and she is able to pull the heavy load all the way up the mountain.<a id="rch1en49" class="calibre7"></a><sup class="calibre12"><a href="notes.xhtml#ch1en49" class="calibre5">49</a></sup> Like this engine-that-can once she really puts her mind to it, we too are often told we can overpower our own limitations if we concentrate hard enough on doing so.</p>
<p class="indent">So why shouldn’t we, hearing that finding our way to God is impossible, simply pull ourselves up by our bootstraps and vow to make the impossible happen, anyway? Even if we aren’t sure we can make it to the <a id="page_14" class="calibre7"></a>top of the mountain, we likely reason, we might as well give it our best shot. I once saw a coffee mug that recommended, along these lines, a kind of spiritually modified version of our just-do-it mind-set. “Do your best,” it read. “God will take care of the rest.” Hard to argue with this statement, because it seems so very reasonable and balanced.</p>
<p class="indent">Taking such a reasonable and balanced approach might actually get in the way of our perceiving God’s own self-revelation. This is because revelation comes our way not in drips and drabs made manifest by our own best efforts, but as a pure, whole, and often unwieldy gift. Divine revelation is an offering, by God, of God’s own self for us. Knowing God is not like doing a science project, where you test and hypothesize and examine results. It is not like writing a book, where you are working to put together sentences until you craft paragraphs and then pages that seem coherent and true. Rather, it is more like receiving someone who wants to share life with us. As Jesus put it, “Look! I’m standing at the door and knocking. If any hear my voice and open the door, I will come in to be with them, and will have dinner with them, and they will have dinner with me.”<a id="rch1en50" class="calibre7"></a><sup class="calibre12"><a href="notes.xhtml#ch1en50" class="calibre5">50</a></sup></p>
<p class="indent">This is all well and good, of course, for those who in one way or another hear God knocking. But what about those of us who have not had that experience and who remain skeptical that such experience is possible or, even, desirable? In the next section I suggest that, even though we cannot acquire knowledge of God by way of our own efforts—whether through good works, scientific inquiry, or artistic pursuits—God presents God’s own self to all kinds of people, on all kinds of spiritual journeys, and in many kinds of ways.</p>
<h3 class="h2">T<small class="calibre3">HE</small> J<small class="calibre3">OURNEY TO</small> I<small class="calibre3">NTIMATE</small> K<small class="calibre3">NOWLEDGE</small></h3>
<p class="indent">If you are someone who appreciates the mystery of God but who is really skeptical that you want or even can in some way find your way into the experience of it, you are in very good company. Even in Scripture—a place where you might expect most of the cast of characters to be consciously <a id="page_15" class="calibre7"></a>walking with God—there are numerous examples of people who at first either resist mystery or sometimes blithely accept it, but with no expectation that they themselves could ever participate in it. Consider Moses, who at first holds God’s call at arm’s length but winds up leading the nation of Israel out of Egypt and into the Promised Land.<a id="rch1en51" class="calibre7"></a><sup class="calibre12"><a href="notes.xhtml#ch1en51" class="calibre5">51</a></sup> Or the psalmist who asks God, “What are human beings that you think about them?”<a id="rch1en52" class="calibre7"></a><sup class="calibre12"><a href="notes.xhtml#ch1en52" class="calibre5">52</a></sup> Or Mary, who at first inquires of the angel Gabriel, “How will this happen?”<a id="rch1en53" class="calibre7"></a><sup class="calibre12"><a href="notes.xhtml#ch1en53" class="calibre5">53</a></sup> And then there is Jonah, whose resistance is so extreme it takes the form of sin.<a id="rch1en54" class="calibre7"></a><sup class="calibre12"><a href="notes.xhtml#ch1en54" class="calibre5">54</a></sup> And Nicodemus, who keeps showing up even when he can’t quite take the plunge.<a id="rch1en55" class="calibre7"></a><sup class="calibre12"><a href="notes.xhtml#ch1en55" class="calibre5">55</a></sup> And Martha, who accepts and makes provision for others to participate in mystery, but who sometimes needs to stop managing everything long enough to participate herself.<a id="rch1en56" class="calibre7"></a><sup class="calibre12"><a href="notes.xhtml#ch1en56" class="calibre5">56</a></sup></p>
<p class="indent">Theology, as a discipline, benefits when it takes into account all of these sorts of personality types and journey-places. Some approaches cater to those who, like Ellie in <em class="calibre8">Contact</em>, need a little more rational, empirical explanation before they can move toward participation in that which cannot be entirely understood. Thus, one approach to theology focuses on <em class="calibre8">apologetics</em>, or making a case for proposed beliefs.<a id="rch1en57" class="calibre7"></a><sup class="calibre12"><a href="notes.xhtml#ch1en57" class="calibre5">57</a></sup> Other approaches, trying to challenge those who have accepted mystery to step more deeply into a concrete relationship with it, focus more on <em class="calibre8">testimony</em>, or telling the story of the personal and profound difference beliefs make to our lives of faith. This is the approach the woman takes when she goes back to the townspeople and speaks words about her encounter with Jesus at the well.<a id="rch1en58" class="calibre7"></a><sup class="calibre12"><a href="notes.xhtml#ch1en58" class="calibre5">58</a></sup> She doesn’t try to prove he is Messiah—she simply tells the story of their encounter, and how it is affecting her. This testimony is, finally, what leads the townspeople to travel to the well. At first they believe because of the testimony of the woman, but then they believe because they have heard Jesus’s teachings for themselves.<a id="rch1en59" class="calibre7"></a><sup class="calibre12"><a href="notes.xhtml#ch1en59" class="calibre5">59</a></sup></p>
<p class="indent">Similarly, Paul in his travels described in Acts 17 is eager for those he encounters to experience God for themselves. As Jesus did before him, Paul frames the message of the Gospel in whatever ways best communicate it to particular people in particular contexts. He knows that different people have different kinds of relationships to that which is mysterious, <a id="page_16" class="calibre7"></a>and he is willing to employ a full range of approaches in speaking about God with them.</p>
<p class="indent">Several days after he arrives in Athens, following a series of debates he has had “in the synagogue . . . with . . . Jews and the devout persons,”<a id="rch1en60" class="calibre7"></a><sup class="calibre12"><a href="notes.xhtml#ch1en60" class="calibre5">60</a></sup> Paul is invited to speak at the Aereopagus, a place that serves as a hub for public exchange, debate, and judicial proceedings. Clearly, Paul has already gained the respect and interest of the community leaders, who now want to hear more of what he has to say. Following his own dictum that Christians are to be “all things to all people,”<a id="rch1en61" class="calibre7"></a><sup class="calibre12"><a href="notes.xhtml#ch1en61" class="calibre5">61</a></sup> Paul tries to engage them in ways they will appreciate, showing them respect as he uses both apologetics and testimony to convey the good news. “I see you are religious in every way,” he says to them, “you even have an altar to an unknown God.”<a id="rch1en62" class="calibre7"></a><sup class="calibre12"><a href="notes.xhtml#ch1en62" class="calibre5">62</a></sup> It’s interesting, though, that finally Paul does not develop any kind of proof for the fact that this God is actually known.<a id="rch1en63" class="calibre7"></a><sup class="calibre12"><a href="notes.xhtml#ch1en63" class="calibre5">63</a></sup> Rather, he simply asserts it as true. “What therefore you worship as unknown,” he says, “this I proclaim to you.” He continues by making two important points: First, he explains that the approach the Athenians are taking will not get them to the God who is unknown. God cannot be accessed, he says, by way of shrines, idols, or any human efforts or creations. Paul’s second point, however, is that there <em class="calibre8">is</em> a way for the unknown God to be known. That way comes from God, not from human capacities. Paul makes the startling claim that God is “not far from each one of us,” insisting that God’s presence has been made known by way of the resurrection of “the man whom God has appointed.”<a id="rch1en64" class="calibre7"></a><sup class="calibre12"><a href="notes.xhtml#ch1en64" class="calibre5">64</a></sup></p>
<p class="indent">Among other things, Paul is a very good advertiser. He notices there is something his immediate constituency (the community of Athenians) desires, and he notes how they are trying to get it (by creating idols). He recognizes and affirms their desire, but then names what they, perhaps, are already aware of: their methods are ineffectual; they cannot get what they want in the way they are going after it (Paul suggests, in fact, that their altar “to an unknown God” is proof that they recognize their failure to know God as they want to). But Paul shows them that they <em class="calibre8">can</em> get what it is they are seeking. Interestingly, it is not exactly by employing another way of getting it, but by recognizing it has already been made <a id="page_17" class="calibre7"></a>available. <em class="calibre8">Yeah . . . there’s an app for that</em>, we might imagine Paul claiming in our day and age.<a id="rch1en65" class="calibre7"></a><sup class="calibre12"><a href="notes.xhtml#ch1en65" class="calibre5">65</a></sup> <em class="calibre8">But</em>, he might quickly add, <em class="calibre8">it is not an app made by human hands. It is a gift of God. And it is as intuitive and interactive as it is possible to get</em>.</p>
<p class="indent">“God is not far from any of us,” Paul insists.<a id="rch1en66" class="calibre7"></a><sup class="calibre12"><a href="notes.xhtml#ch1en66" class="calibre5">66</a></sup> This is because this God who created all things also created each of us who exist in this world. God gives us our “life,” our “breath,” and “all things.”<a id="rch1en67" class="calibre7"></a><sup class="calibre12"><a href="notes.xhtml#ch1en67" class="calibre5">67</a></sup></p>
<p class="indent">Paul is here telling the Athenians—and us—a great deal about the character of revelation. He emphasizes that revelation is accomplished by God, and not by us. He explains that revelation means that the God we thought is unknowable is knowable, grounded in the person of Jesus Christ. And he clearly thinks, as he testifies to the Athenians, that the kind of knowledge of God that brings life is the kind that somehow includes <em class="calibre8">participation</em> on the part of the knower. Paul is suggesting that “God is not far from each of us” and neither are we far from “the one in whom we live and move and have our being.”<a id="rch1en68" class="calibre7"></a><sup class="calibre12"><a href="notes.xhtml#ch1en68" class="calibre5">68</a></sup> The model of knowing for which Paul is advocating—even as he develops his arguments before the Athenians—is not as much about gaining information as it is about being affected <em class="calibre8">by</em> the content of what is being known, and known better and better. For those who speak French or Spanish, it is the “knowing” associated with <em class="calibre8">connaître</em> or <em class="calibre8">conocer</em> more than with the “knowing” conveyed by <em class="calibre8">savoir</em> or <em class="calibre8">saber</em>. It is a knowing that is not about gathering data as much as it is about entering into relationship. It is a knowing of a subject matter that is, in fact, itself a Subject.</p>
<h3 class="h2">“P<small class="calibre3">ARTICIPATING</small>” <small class="calibre3">IN THE</small> G<small class="calibre3">OD</small> W<small class="calibre3">HO</small> I<small class="calibre3">S</small> N<small class="calibre3">EAR TO</small> U<small class="calibre3">S</small></h3>
<p class="indent">Following Paul’s speech to the Athenians, we are told that “some scoffed”<a id="rch1en69" class="calibre7"></a><sup class="calibre12"><a href="notes.xhtml#ch1en69" class="calibre5">69</a></sup> and “some . . . came to believe.”<a id="rch1en70" class="calibre7"></a><sup class="calibre12"><a href="notes.xhtml#ch1en70" class="calibre5">70</a></sup> Two people who joined Paul are indicated by name: Dionysius the Areopagite and Damaris.<a id="rch1en71" class="calibre7"></a><sup class="calibre12"><a href="notes.xhtml#ch1en71" class="calibre5">71</a></sup> While we don’t know the specifics of their conversion, it is likely safe to say they in some way came to recognize their participation in the God Paul <a id="page_18" class="calibre7"></a>identifies as the one in whom “we live, move, and exist.”<a id="rch1en72" class="calibre7"></a><sup class="calibre12"><a href="notes.xhtml#ch1en72" class="calibre5">72</a></sup> A question for those of us who want to know God is: How do we—with Dionysius and Damaris—go about participating in this God Paul says is near to us? Paul suggests we need to set aside our own idols, recognizing the limits of our spiritual efforts and even repenting of our ignorance.<a id="rch1en73" class="calibre7"></a><sup class="calibre12"><a href="notes.xhtml#ch1en73" class="calibre5">73</a></sup> This is hard for us to do, especially in a culture that encourages us to override any limitation.</p>
<p class="indent">Referencing again the can-do emphasis in American culture, we historically seem to name as heroes those who press the boundaries of their own limits. Think of Jack Bauer, the star of the Fox TV series <em class="calibre8">24</em>, who not only saves the world in twenty-four hours, but does it without ever dozing off, or eating a snack, or using a bathroom. In 2014, sales of Red Bull energy continued their rapid increase, selling 5.6 billion cans in 170 countries. It is no wonder that <em class="calibre8">Forbes</em> magazine named it as one of the “world’s most valuable brands.”<a id="rch1en74" class="calibre7"></a><sup class="calibre12"><a href="notes.xhtml#ch1en74" class="calibre5">74</a></sup> There’s little question, I think, that we imagine Red Bull makes us a bit more like Jack Bauer. More able to push through our limits; more able to do the things we think we can get done.</p>
<p class="indent">Finding ways to conquer limits might be useful for accomplishing many things, but it is not a helpful strategy for knowing God. Just as problematic, however, is attempting to master our finitude by dramatically declaring that we know nothing of value. This is because <em class="calibre8">thinking we have the capacity to figure it all out</em> and <em class="calibre8">deciding to forego figuring anything out</em> suffer the same malady—each strategy refuses to acknowledge the fact and implications of finitude, the first by resisting its limits and the second by resisting its possibilities. In short, neither being a know-it-all nor throwing up one’s hands in a gesture of triumphant helplessness is really being very honest about the creaturely condition in which we find ourselves. And neither does anything to advance depth of relationship. We cannot know everything, and may not be able to know anything, completely, by way of our own doing. But the story of revelation does not end there. We actually know, and can relay, a great deal of what is true, not because we have the capacity to transcend our creaturely limits but because God has entered into these limits and shown us how beautifully they equip us to participate in the things that matter most.</p>
<h3 class="h2"><a id="page_19" class="calibre5"></a>T<small class="calibre3">IP</small> #1 <small class="calibre3">FOR</small> S<small class="calibre3">PEAKING ABOUT THE</small> I<small class="calibre3">NFINITE</small> G<small class="calibre3">OD</small>: A<small class="calibre3">PPRECIATE</small> A<small class="calibre3">NALOGIES</small></h3>
<p class="indent">Once we have recognized not only the greatness of God but also our own incapacity (in and of ourselves) to know God, we might find ourselves back to wondering how we can say anything about God at all. How can we who are limited honestly believe we can understand and articulate something meaningful about the Reality that is beyond all understanding? If God is mystery, shouldn’t we leave well enough alone?</p>
<p class="indent">Many of us feel—and maybe a lot of the time!—as though it takes everything we’ve got just to muddle through another day in the office, get Sunday’s sermon written, make time to return that phone call, get the kids shuttled around to all their after-school activities, or pass that big test at the end of the week. We have enough trouble negotiating our complicated, over-packed lives, so full they are of work to do, fun things to try, responsibilities to fulfill, daily needs to attend to, and people with whom to build relationships. Our life in the here and now is plenty enough to manage, it seems, without setting out to say something about a God we need to work to see and strain to hear, especially if what we finally see and hear is only a fraction of what there is to know.<a id="rch1en75" class="calibre7"></a><sup class="calibre12"><a href="notes.xhtml#ch1en75" class="calibre5">75</a></sup></p>
<p class="indent">Recognizing the limits of even the best language we have for God, some people of faith find there is much we can learn about God by setting words to the side altogether. How does being silent before God create a context in which God can be experienced? Traditions emphasizing these approaches are commonly known as <em class="calibre8">apophatic</em> or following the <em class="calibre8">via negativa</em>—coming to know God by way of what cannot, rather than what can, be said.</p>
<p class="indent">This book is funded by the conviction that words about who God is and what God is up to can facilitate knowledge of and relationship to God. As such, it participates more in what are known as <em class="calibre8">kataphatic</em> (active way) traditions than in <em class="calibre8">apophatic</em> ones. To say that the words we exchange when we participate in a Bible study, the words we share in when we engage in worship, and even the words we might hear when we go to a good movie help us understand and know God better is not to forget, of course, <a id="page_20" class="calibre7"></a>that any and all words about God are limited. But it is to celebrate the fact that words, though they can never tell us <em class="calibre8">everything</em>, can often tell us <em class="calibre8">something</em> of value.</p>
<p class="indent">Theologians have always, of course, tried to speak in ways that honor the magnitude of God while at the same time clearly conveying particular, concrete truths about who God is and what God is up to in the world. The writer of the Gospel of John, crafting his prologue to his account of Jesus’s life, formulated a poetic way of bearing witness that must have seemed, to some, to be oxymoronic. What could it possibly mean, they surely wondered, to say “the Word became flesh”?<a id="rch1en76" class="calibre7"></a><sup class="calibre12"><a href="notes.xhtml#ch1en76" class="calibre5">76</a></sup> The Word (or <em class="calibre8">logos</em>) was thought to be not concrete and specific flesh, but the organizing principle of the universe. And this person who dwelt among us in the flesh—how could he, possibly, be the Word? Exactly, Paul argues. And he goes on, in the same vein, to talk about the resurrection of the dead. Again, a mixing of something mysterious with something all too concrete.</p>
<p class="indent">The leaders of the earliest church councils, similarly, looked for ways to articulate, concretely, the teachings of the church without compromising on the divine mystery. “One <em class="calibre8">ousia</em> in three <em class="calibre8">hypostases</em>,” they said, for example, in 362 CE—describing the character of God as triune.<a id="rch1en77" class="calibre7"></a><sup class="calibre12"><a href="notes.xhtml#ch1en77" class="calibre5">77</a></sup> When asked what they meant by this, given that <em class="calibre8">ousia</em> and <em class="calibre8">hypostasis</em> were commonly understood to be synonyms, they said: “what mattered was not the language used but the meaning underlying it.”<a id="rch1en78" class="calibre7"></a><sup class="calibre12"><a href="notes.xhtml#ch1en78" class="calibre5">78</a></sup> The words, they were acknowledging, conveyed something. But they did not exhaust everything there is to know about the triune God.</p>
<p class="indent">Most notably, perhaps, Thomas Aquinas back in the twelfth century sought to give us the means to balance these concerns by articulating how all our language for God is <em class="calibre8">analogical</em>. It is not <em class="calibre8">univocal</em>, he argued, meaning that our words do not exhaust the reality they are meaning to reference. And it is also not <em class="calibre8">equivocal</em>, he said, reminding us that it is <em class="calibre8">not</em> the case our words have <em class="calibre8">no</em> relationship to what they are meaning to reference. Our theological language reflects the fact that we know <em class="calibre8">something</em> true, but not <em class="calibre8">everything</em>, about the mystery that is God.</p>
<p class="indent">An example might help show the importance of this. Let’s take the statement “God is love.” Thomas would remind us that this statement is <a id="page_21" class="calibre7"></a>not univocal, because whatever “God is love” actually means, the phrase itself is only a fraction of what God’s love is all about. But neither is the statement equivocal, precisely because “God is love” tells us something true and, even, transformative. It is an amazing and humbling thing that we can say things that are true about the God who will not be defined by any words or lack of words, but only by God’s very own self.</p>
<p class="indent">A related way to understanding the analogical character of our language for God is to remember what we learned in English class: analogies are both like and not like that to which they refer. “Mama always said life was like a box of chocolates,” Forrest Gump famously says.<a id="rch1en79" class="calibre7"></a><sup class="calibre12"><a href="notes.xhtml#ch1en79" class="calibre5">79</a></sup> “You never know what you’re going to get.” But life is also, of course and in many ways, <em class="calibre8">not</em> like a box of chocolates. To acknowledge both the “is” and the “is not” of any particular analogy for God is, then, neither to reduce God to riddles nor to try to slip away from saying anything real or concrete about who God is and what God is like. Rather than subtracting from our knowledge, our hope is that acknowledging both that “God is love” and that “God is <em class="calibre8">not</em> love” adds something <em class="calibre8">to</em> our knowledge of the God we truly know as loving. It reminds us, again, that whatever “God is love” references is beyond anything we could even begin to articulate. The same is true for other analogies: God <em class="calibre8">is</em> ruler, king, and the all-knowing One, for example, but at the same time <em class="calibre8">is not</em> ruler, king, and the all-knowing One, at least in the sense we—with our limited understanding—might understand these titles. The bottom line is that we actually know more, and not less, about God when we risk remembering both the “is” and “is not” of every analogy we use.</p>
<p class="indent">Let me illustrate the relevance of what I am saying, here, by considering an analogy for God that has been particularly meaningful to most Christian believers over the centuries: the analogy that God is our “Father.” Jesus prayed to the Father, teaching us to do likewise. Some have argued that the language of fatherhood is so important to how we understand God that Father should be thought of more univocally than analogically (to quote Thomas, as mentioned above).<a id="rch1en80" class="calibre7"></a><sup class="calibre12"><a href="notes.xhtml#ch1en80" class="calibre5">80</a></sup> But forgetting the analogical character of the Fatherhood of God actually diminishes its capacity to draw us into the mystery of the divine fatherliness because it confines us <a id="page_22" class="calibre7"></a>to human understandings of what it means to be a father. Theologians as wide-ranging as Calvin (sixteenth century) and Elizabeth A. Johnson (twenty-first century) agree that any time we think we have captured God in any one term or idea we have committed the sin of idolatry. Calvin reminds us, in his commentary on Isaiah, that we can use the analogy of mother as well as father for God because “by no [one] metaphor . . . can [God’s] incomparable goodness be described.”<a id="rch1en81" class="calibre7"></a><sup class="calibre12"><a href="notes.xhtml#ch1en81" class="calibre5">81</a></sup> Johnson points out that using analogies for God in addition to father helps us have a fuller sense of what God’s fatherliness is all about.<a id="rch1en82" class="calibre7"></a><sup class="calibre12"><a href="notes.xhtml#ch1en82" class="calibre5">82</a></sup></p>
<p class="indent">Karl Barth reminds us that the God who is our kind, nurturing, protective Father is at the same time <em class="calibre8">not</em> father in the sense that God’s fatherliness could never be determined or confined by earthly notions of fatherliness.<a id="rch1en83" class="calibre7"></a><sup class="calibre12"><a href="notes.xhtml#ch1en83" class="calibre5">83</a></sup> In other words, it is not as though we assess God’s qualifications or the shape of God’s fatherliness the way we might ascertain (for example) that a human person is a father because he has a child he cares for and provides for. The claim of faith, rather, is that it is God’s fatherliness that sheds light on human fatherliness, and not the other way around. As Barth suggests, when considering what <em class="calibre8">can</em> be said rightly of God, it is best to work “from above to below,” rather than “from below to above.”<a id="rch1en84" class="calibre7"></a><sup class="calibre12"><a href="notes.xhtml#ch1en84" class="calibre5">84</a></sup> When we call God “Father,” for example, we should consider what who God is tells us about the character of fatherhood, rather than what various versions of human fatherhood tell us about God. The words we use for God, he explains, are then premised in our faith in God, rather than derived from any likeness we surmise exists between ourselves and God.</p>
<h3 class="h2">T<small class="calibre3">IP</small> #2 <small class="calibre3">FOR</small> S<small class="calibre3">PEAKING ABOUT THE</small> I<small class="calibre3">NFINITE</small> G<small class="calibre3">OD</small>: T<small class="calibre3">ALK ABOUT</small> W<small class="calibre3">HAT</small> M<small class="calibre3">ATTERS</small></h3>
<p class="indent">A second tip for speaking about the infinite God is to focus less on how much we can say and more on testifying to <em class="calibre8">how what we know matters</em>. Madeline L’Engle tells the story, along these lines, that a woman came up to her after a lecture and said, “I read <em class="calibre8">A Wrinkle in Time</em> when I was eight <a id="page_23" class="calibre7"></a>or nine. I didn’t understand it, but I knew what it was about.” L’Engle goes on to comment that, once we know “what it’s about,” we will “have the courage to go wherever we are asked to go, even if we fear that the road might take us through danger and pain.”<a id="rch1en85" class="calibre7"></a><sup class="calibre12"><a href="notes.xhtml#ch1en85" class="calibre5">85</a></sup> This, of course, is a pretty tall order. The implication is that what analogical language draws us into is something of value that cannot be ignored and that even transforms us.</p>
<p class="indent">This short account of L’Engle has helped me think more productively about what it is we are doing when we seek to ascertain and articulate God’s revelation. Recognizing our limits, we know we can never understand it in any exhaustive sense. But, surprisingly enough, we <em class="calibre8">can</em> know what it’s about. I don’t understand God’s love—it is so very great—but I know it is <em class="calibre8">about</em> my being claimed by God, my being held by God, and me having the capacity, therefore, to reach out and enter into mutual relationship to others.</p>
<p class="indent">As we move in the chapters that follow into consideration of doctrines such as the Trinity, salvation, and Christian hope, it will be helpful to keep L’Engle’s distinction in mind. We will never <em class="calibre8">understand</em> (for example) the three-in-one and one-in-three, but we <em class="calibre8">can</em> know, and discuss, and teach <em class="calibre8">what it is about</em> and how it matters to our lives. And once we start doing that, we will be well positioned to understand God’s revelation less as information to be gathered and disseminated and more as a means to being met, made, blessed, and sent by God.</p>
<h3 class="h2">T<small class="calibre3">IP</small> #3 <small class="calibre3">FOR</small> S<small class="calibre3">PEAKING ABOUT THE</small> I<small class="calibre3">NFINITE</small> G<small class="calibre3">OD</small>: S<small class="calibre3">AY</small> S<small class="calibre3">OMETHING ABOUT</small> E<small class="calibre3">VERYTHING</small></h3>
<p class="indent">Once we realize it is impossible fully to understand the things that matter most, we might be tempted to think we shouldn’t even try. We might decide—as did that audacious fellow student I met on my first day of college—that since understanding God or even fellow human beings is a losing game, we may as well focus our attention on things at which we can at least appear to be “expert.”</p>
<p class="indent"><a id="page_24" class="calibre7"></a>Whether it be saying everything about bacteria or about the emergence of jazz in early twentieth-century American culture; whether it be saying everything about the way the protons and electrons of an atom continue to interact with one another even when separated from a mile of distance or saying everything about the number of ways it is possible successfully to boil an egg; many of us are vastly knowledgeable about <em class="calibre8">something</em>. A doctor may know everything about neurology but not dare to say words about gynecology; a professor in seminary might brilliantly interpret New Testament Greek but laugh at the prospect of teaching a Christian education class; and a chef may be expert at making pastries but be considered unqualified to grill the steaks at a fancy restaurant.</p>
<p class="indent">In her book <em class="calibre8">Living by Fiction</em>, Annie Dillard points out, along these lines, that most of what we have to say to one another is about “artifacts”—that is, specific things that have already been made by human beings that can be created, managed, examined, known, and mastered.<a id="rch1en86" class="calibre7"></a><sup class="calibre12"><a href="notes.xhtml#ch1en86" class="calibre5">86</a></sup> Dillard seems to include, in her understanding of artifacts, not only physical objects we make and use, or make and admire. She includes, also, the systems we develop that frame what is beyond our scope—perhaps the periodic table, the color wheel, or, even, a birdwatchers’ guide. What is lacking in our world and our lives is not intriguing discussions of artifacts. What is lacking, she says, are those who are courageous enough to say something immediate about existence itself. “Who will interpret the raw universe?” she asks. “We have a shortage of metaphysicians.”<a id="rch1en87" class="calibre7"></a><sup class="calibre12"><a href="notes.xhtml#ch1en87" class="calibre5">87</a></sup> This is a problem, Dillard thinks, because “if we confine our interpretive investigations to strictly bounded aspects of culture . . . we miss learning what we most want to know.”<a id="rch1en88" class="calibre7"></a><sup class="calibre12"><a href="notes.xhtml#ch1en88" class="calibre5">88</a></sup></p>
<p class="indent">But what is it that we most want to know? Influenced by Dillard, I have come to think about it this way: what we want to know most, I believe, is not everything about something, but something about everything. We want someone to say something that makes sense of the cosmos, of creation, of God, of love, of suffering, of existence. We are impressed with those who know everything there is to know about the periodic table, but we also want someone to risk saying <em class="calibre8">something</em> meaningful about the raw universe, even while acknowledging it will never be possible to <a id="page_25" class="calibre7"></a>say <em class="calibre8">everything</em> about it. The question is: Who among us is willing to risk speaking about what matters most?</p>
<p class="indent">Theology is committed to knowing and saying something about everything. It is in the business of articulating what matters most to our lives, and the life of this world. As such, it is a discipline that risks engaging in conversations outside of its presumed expertise. The perimeters of the theological enterprise are delimited not by what theologians can most ably navigate, nor even by the specific callings of God to engage particular needs of the world. Bill Placher, reveling in the wide expanse of possibilities for theological discourse as they are reflected in the writings of Barth, writes: “From a Christian perspective one can engage in conversation with anybody about anything—from Mozart to Nietzsche to Pure Land Buddhism.”<a id="rch1en89" class="calibre7"></a><sup class="calibre12"><a href="notes.xhtml#ch1en89" class="calibre5">89</a></sup> This, again, is not because Christians are expert in all subjects but because they are free to discover and articulate whatever something about everything is life-giving for all.</p>
<p class="indent">The key, of course, is knowing what to look for and being able to discern it. How do we discern God’s Word in this world so packed with both beauty and discordance? How do we go about exploring all that is around us in ways that get lost in the wonder of it all while still making judgments about meaning, value, and truth? Why is it so hard to get to what matters most, and how are we going to surmount these obstacles in our quest to discover and articulate the right words to say about God?</p>
<h3 class="h2">T<small class="calibre3">O</small> W<small class="calibre3">HOM</small> I<small class="calibre3">S</small> G<small class="calibre3">OD</small> D<small class="calibre3">ISCLOSED</small>? G<small class="calibre3">ENERAL AND</small> S<small class="calibre3">PECIAL</small> R<small class="calibre3">EVELATION</small></h3>
<p class="indent">Calvin gives us a couple of categories that can help us frame our search for meaning in relation to God’s self-revelation. In brief, he distinguishes between <em class="calibre8">general</em> and <em class="calibre8">special</em> revelation. By <em class="calibre8">general revelation</em>, he is referring to how God is self-revealed equally and to everyone in the world shared by all of us—in nature, in our philosophies, and in the way we conceive and <a id="page_26" class="calibre7"></a>develop governmental, ethical, and social systems. By <em class="calibre8">special revelation</em>, Calvin is referencing how God reveals Godself to particular individuals in particular ways not common to everyone. God’s self-disclosure to the Israelites, for example, is a story of God selecting one particular nation to be God’s people. God chose to love Israel, the biblical witness attests, not because of any virtue or merit of their own, but just because God wanted to.<a id="rch1en90" class="calibre7"></a><sup class="calibre12"><a href="notes.xhtml#ch1en90" class="calibre5">90</a></sup> God brought the father of Israel, Abram (later to be called “Abraham”) outside to see the stars, telling him: “so shall your descendants be.”<a id="rch1en91" class="calibre7"></a><sup class="calibre12"><a href="notes.xhtml#ch1en91" class="calibre5">91</a></sup> Special revelation, in this case, names the fact that Abraham was called by name, in the context of a particular event not experienced in general and by everyone.</p>
<p class="indent">When we consider how the doctrine of special revelation hits the ground in relation to our day-to-day lives, we will likely raise concerns about the sense in which it seems to endorse exclusivity even as we give thanks for the ways in which it affirms God’s self-disclosure as personal and intimate. There is no question that, historically, this doctrine has been used to advance the idea that some are “in” and some are “out,” in relation to God’s favor.<a id="rch1en92" class="calibre7"></a><sup class="calibre12"><a href="notes.xhtml#ch1en92" class="calibre5">92</a></sup> It is strongly linked to the controversial doctrines of <em class="calibre8">election</em> and <em class="calibre8">predestination</em>—the idea that God selects whom God wills without rhyme or reason. At the extreme, it is linked even to the problematic idea of <em class="calibre8">double predestination</em>—that God elects some to salvation and others to reprobation or damnation.<a id="rch1en93" class="calibre7"></a><sup class="calibre12"><a href="notes.xhtml#ch1en93" class="calibre5">93</a></sup></p>
<p class="indent">But it at the same time reminds us that the God who reveals Godself to us does so as the one who knows and loves <em class="calibre8">us</em>—as particular, cherished ones. What the doctrine of special revelation shows us is that God’s self-disclosure is not geared toward showcasing <em class="calibre8">God</em> in isolation from the world. God’s self-revelation is for the purpose of showing that God knows <em class="calibre8">us</em>. Christians confess that God meets us, incarnationally, in the person of Jesus Christ. “The Word made flesh”<a id="rch1en94" class="calibre7"></a><sup class="calibre12"><a href="notes.xhtml#ch1en94" class="calibre5">94</a></sup> is, indeed, the central instance of special revelation in the Christian faith. But special revelation extends even more broadly than the incarnation to all the ways God meets us personally and particularly; to all the ways God demonstrates God knows us and holds us dear. The Bible is full of particular stories of particular people being called in particular ways both to know they belong to God <a id="page_27" class="calibre7"></a>and to act accordingly: among them are Moses, Jonah, Rahab, Samuel, Esther, the psalmists, Mary (Jesus’s mother), Peter, Mary (Martha’s sister), the man born blind, Paul, and Lydia. The Christian conviction that God continues calling particular people in particular ways reminds us, then, that the content of God’s self-disclosure is not only about <em class="calibre8">who God is</em>, but also about <em class="calibre8">who we are</em>.</p>
<h3 class="h2">T<small class="calibre3">HE</small> S<small class="calibre3">TARTLING</small> “S<small class="calibre3">O</small> W<small class="calibre3">HAT</small>?” <small class="calibre3">OF</small> S<small class="calibre3">PECIAL</small> R<small class="calibre3">EVELATION</small></h3>
<p class="indent">This last point is an important takeaway of the doctrine of revelation. To recap it in a different way: at first, we may have thought the most startling thing about revelation is that it gives us ways to know the God who is unknowable. As if this isn’t remarkable enough, it is also the case that God’s self-revelation gives us ways to know ourselves; to see ourselves in a new way; to see ourselves as God sees us. We are God’s people; we are God’s children; we are heirs to God’s promises; we are beloved.</p>
<p class="indent">This is the kind of knowledge that does more than boggle our minds. It, in fact, changes everything because it undoes and remakes us from our very core.<a id="rch1en95" class="calibre7"></a><sup class="calibre12"><a href="notes.xhtml#ch1en95" class="calibre5">95</a></sup> It is knowledge that is, arguably, nothing less than redemptive. Why is this? Because when we see ourselves as God sees us—as chosen, holy, and beloved—we carry ourselves in this world differently.<a id="rch1en96" class="calibre7"></a><sup class="calibre12"><a href="notes.xhtml#ch1en96" class="calibre5">96</a></sup> When we see ourselves as God sees us, we seek to discern and articulate what matters most as those who are reminded that <em class="calibre8">we</em> matter, because God has entered into relationship with us. When we are reminded of our identity as God’s children, we gain confidence that we can say something about everything, because we in a very real way have learned something that has changed everything for us. To know God, in fact, is to know something that makes a difference to everything.</p>
<p class="indent">But how, concretely speaking, do we go about receiving special revelation? Quite maddening, for some, is the answer commonly given by Calvin and others. That is: there is nothing at all we can do to uncover or <a id="page_28" class="calibre7"></a>discover knowledge of God; it simply comes to us as a gift. We will immediately ask a follow-up question, in light of this: If God is solely responsible for doing the revealing, and there is nothing whatsoever we can do, why is it so hard (and for some more than others) to know the presence, character, and work of God? Is God lying down on the job? Or are we just not paying enough attention?</p>
<p class="indent">When I was in seminary I had a professor named Diogenes Allen who used to encourage us students to pay attention. “Be enough of a person that God can find,” he would tell us. I don’t think he believed we could find our way to God ourselves. But I do think he was giving us some down-to-earth advice about how we could give the Holy Spirit a bit of a leg up in conveying what it is God has to say. I thought about Dr. Allen’s exhortation quite a bit, in the years I was working on my MDiv.<a id="rch1en97" class="calibre7"></a><sup class="calibre12"><a href="notes.xhtml#ch1en97" class="calibre5">97</a></sup> And I started noticing, in Scripture, stories of people who hear God speaking, but only when they pause long enough to hear. My favorite is the story of Elijah.<a id="rch1en98" class="calibre7"></a><sup class="calibre12"><a href="notes.xhtml#ch1en98" class="calibre5">98</a></sup> Running away from Queen Jezebel, he is ministered to by angels sent by God. Forty days and nights of this, and finally he arrives at his self-determined destination. He sits down in a cave to rest. And it is then—and only then—that he hears the voice of God calling him to the mouth of the cave. To cut a long and very interesting story short, what God tells Elijah is very different from what Elijah imagines God will tell him. While Elijah apparently expects God to be fully understanding about his running away from Jezebel, and very proud of him for being the “only one left in Israel” who has not bowed down to the false god, Ba’al, God instead listens to Elijah’s story and then replies, simply, “Go back the way you came.”<a id="rch1en99" class="calibre7"></a><sup class="calibre12"><a href="notes.xhtml#ch1en99" class="calibre5">99</a></sup> The point that bears notice in this rich and somewhat humorous story is that, though Elijah has no say in shaping the content of what God tells him, he actually does seem to contribute to when and where he hears God’s words.</p>
<p class="indent">This story seems to jibe with contemporary accounts of spiritual journeys. So often seminary students and pastors, recalling how they came to discern their call to ministry, include reference to the number of times they believe God tried to tell them what God had in mind when they just kept pressing forward with their lives, determined to resist listening. Only <a id="page_29" class="calibre7"></a>once they found themselves in their version of Elijah’s “cave” were they able to hear God’s direction for their lives. To illustrate this with a contemporary example: the well-known poet Christian Wiman testifies that there were three events in his life that created the space he needed to listen for God. First, he lost, for a time, his capacity to write poetry. Second, he fell in love. Third, he was diagnosed with a rare, incurable blood cancer.<a id="rch1en100" class="calibre7"></a><sup class="calibre12"><a href="notes.xhtml#ch1en100" class="calibre5">100</a></sup> Wiman refuses in any way to romanticize his illness, which he views only as dreadful. It is not that he has found “equanimity” in relation to the cancer, he explains, when asked about the nature of his encounter with God. It is that God speaks to him from out of the “abyss” itself.<a id="rch1en101" class="calibre7"></a><sup class="calibre12"><a href="notes.xhtml#ch1en101" class="calibre5">101</a></sup> The unknowable God, it would seem, has the propensity to reach out and be known to us in the many different kinds of spaces we create or experience in our lives—spaces characterized by rest or wonder; study or contemplation; suffering or challenge.</p>
<h3 class="h2">S<small class="calibre3">CRIPTURE AS THE</small> S<small class="calibre3">PACE FOR</small> K<small class="calibre3">NOWING</small></h3>
<p class="indent">One way to understand the place of the Bible, in Christian faith, is that it creates for us a rich space in and through which we can encounter the revelation of God. This is not to say that Scripture is the only place we can encounter God. As Barth reminds us—God can be seen wherever and however God chooses to self-disclose. What is the case, however, is that Christians throughout history have claimed that Scripture is a place where God is found. In the next chapter we will continue exploring revelation by way of considering how Scripture helps create a space in which we can know and speak of God.</p>
</body>
</html>
