<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>Holding Faith</title>
    <meta content="urn:uuid:e0000000-0000-0000-0000-000004415877" name="Adept.expected.resource"/>
    <meta http-equiv="Content-Type" content="text/html; charset=utf-8"/>
  <link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="../../stylesheet.css"/>
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="../../page_styles.css"/>
</head>
  <body class="calibre">
<h2 class="h1"><a id="page_285" class="calibre5"></a><a id="ch10" class="calibre5"></a>Chapter Ten</h2>
<h2 class="h2a">W<small class="calibre11">HAT</small> A<small class="calibre11">RE</small> W<small class="calibre11">E</small> C<small class="calibre11">ALLED TO</small> D<small class="calibre11">O</small>?</h2>
<h3 class="h3x"><a id="ch10lev1" class="calibre5"></a><em class="calibre13">The Doctrine of Christian Vocation</em></h3>
<p class="noindent">In a 1954 Christmas sermon<a id="rch10en1" class="calibre7"></a><sup class="calibre12"><a href="notes.xhtml#ch10en1" class="calibre5">1</a></sup> preached to the prisoners at Basel, Karl Barth warns us not to miss “the hour of this fire right here and now.” It sounds as though he is describing a crisis situation and calling people to action, which is something he often did. In the very same sermon, in fact, he says that the expression “wait and see” is dangerous, since we can’t be sure we will be around tomorrow to hear the message of the Gospel we are hearing today!</p>
<p class="indent">But the fire to which Barth refers in this case is not a fire that needs to be put out, a fire that is hazardous to our existence. Rather, it has a positive connotation—it is the fire of life. Barth quotes the Swiss writer Jeremias Gotthelf, who points out that “life is not a light,” because “a light can be kindled again.” Rather, “life is a fire given by God to burn on earth, just once and never more.”<a id="rch10en2" class="calibre7"></a><sup class="calibre12"><a href="notes.xhtml#ch10en2" class="calibre5">2</a></sup></p>
<p class="indent">There is something about that sight-reading exercise described at the end of the prior chapter that shows what it looks like to take seriously this hour of fire that is our lives. Many days we are handed music we haven’t before seen. We can set it to the side, humbly referencing our ineptitude, feeling bad that we aren’t ready and recommitting ourselves to developing <a id="page_286" class="calibre7"></a>more skills, eating a better breakfast, or doing whatever it takes to be prepared, next time around. Or we can open it up and plow right in, “doing our best and letting God take care of the rest,” hoping to cobble together, with zeal and perspiration, something that might make the world slightly better tomorrow than it is today.</p>
<p class="indent">But to take either of these approaches is to forget we are already members of God’s household; inhabitants of the Kingdom of God; musicians who have ways of hearing the music, even when it is not playing. It is to forget that our job is not to play <em class="calibre8">toward</em> something beautiful, but to play <em class="calibre8">out of</em> what we know to be real. Our job is to live and act in this world ever-attuned to the music of God’s reign, ever-ready to sight-read any music set before us because we have access to its reality and are eager to actualize it in the world.</p>
<p class="indent">What would it take, I wonder, to live like this? How do we go about participating without ceasing in the music of God that seems, right now, to be so hard to hear? Jesus taught us to ask that the Kingdom come and God’s will be done “on earth as it is in heaven.” But how do we go about imagining the reign of God so keenly that we hum it into actuality, feeling the very rhythms of it, respecting those edgy “naturals” so we’ve got ’em when they come—joining in the Spirit’s nimble ways and surprising work?</p>
<p class="indent">My beginning answer is that we need to do a better job of creating the space and time to imagine God’s Kingdom, so that we are ready to play its music whenever we are called upon. And here’s where I default to the standard Christian advice we pastoral types dole out to anyone interested in being a faithful disciple: We need to pray. Read our Bibles. Go to church.</p>
<p class="indent">I know we know these already. But we need to reclaim them in a new way. What if we thought of prayer, Bible reading, and going to church as ways of creating spaces, in our frenetic lives, to imagine the music of God’s Kingdom? In praying we remember we are already part of the reality that we desperately want to help actualize on earth. In seeking God’s Word through reading the Bible and listening for proclamation we learn the details of how the music is working, becoming players, as well as listeners, in the process. In the context of Christian worship we enact the <a id="page_287" class="calibre7"></a>transformation we seek, setting a table around which there are not bipartisan loaves, but one loaf from which everyone, united in Christ, is fed. Playing the music, we leave the sanctuary humming, eager to share it with others.</p>
<p class="indent">To stand up for what we believe, we need be ready to play what is set before us.<a id="rch10en3" class="calibre7"></a><sup class="calibre12"><a href="notes.xhtml#ch10en3" class="calibre5">3</a></sup> And to be ready starts neither with boosting our qualifications nor rushing headlong in, despite ourselves, determined to do our best. It starts with creating sacred spaces in our lives to imagine the reality of the Kingdom of God with clarity and consistency. Insofar as we can envision the peaceable Kingdom in which wolves and lambs lie down together and every tear is wiped away from every eye, I believe we will be driven by impatient hope to do the will of God that makes it actual on this earth.</p>
<h3 class="h2">M<small class="calibre3">AKING</small> G<small class="calibre3">OD</small>’S D<small class="calibre3">ESIRE</small> O<small class="calibre3">URS</small></h3>
<p class="indent">When we focus on imagining what it is that God desires, as people of hope, we emphasize that the work does not and cannot begin with <em class="calibre8">us</em>, but rather is grounded in God. We work hard to do our part, as participants in the labor of God, impatient to witness the coming of God’s Kingdom to earth as it is in heaven. We are impatient for the Kingdom to come not because we have any right to be but because God has promised. And the basis of any action we take to manifest God’s Kingdom in and to this world is the reality of God’s unsurpassable grace and unconditional love. On the basis of our own efforts, we might be able to make the world a better place. But we won’t be able to make wolves lie down with lambs, or wipe every tear away from every eye, or ensure that every child in the world goes to bed every night with a full stomach. At best, we—in and of ourselves—can make a small difference. We can “practice random acts of kindness and senseless beauty”<a id="rch10en4" class="calibre7"></a><sup class="calibre12"><a href="notes.xhtml#ch10en4" class="calibre5">4</a></sup> that might in some small way touch the lives of others, but we will know better than to try to attempt to transform things at their very core. When we focus on our own capacities, our best <a id="page_288" class="calibre7"></a>hope is that somehow God will take the limited things we are able to do and maximize their impact.</p>
<p class="indent">When our work is founded in the promises of a graceful and loving God, our focus is not on what we can and can’t do, but on what God intends to do, and on how God desires to work with us. While we (on our own) can only upgrade the actual, God (with us) makes the impossible possible. A stuttering man leads the chosen ones into the promised land; a virgin bears the Savior of the world; fishermen and peasant women receive the Spirit and become the church.<a id="rch10en5" class="calibre7"></a><sup class="calibre12"><a href="notes.xhtml#ch10en5" class="calibre5">5</a></sup> It is the graceful, loving God who makes possible the impossible dreams God has promised. And this God includes us in bringing these possible impossibilities to fruition. As God used Moses, Abram, and Sarai; as God used Mary, and Peter, and Paul—so God uses us. Essentially. Irreplaceably. We who can do nothing, in and of ourselves, are fully included in the divine life and work. We can do more than tweak, more than improve, more than contribute a little something we hope, somehow, will make a small difference. Rather, we can engage the bold work of participating in the coming Kingdom of God because we have faith that we who can do nothing in and of ourselves can do all things in him who strengthens us.<a id="rch10en6" class="calibre7"></a><sup class="calibre12"><a href="notes.xhtml#ch10en6" class="calibre5">6</a></sup></p>
<p class="indent">With echos of <a href="chapter09.xhtml" class="calibre7">chapter 9</a> in play, we move now, as people of hope, to consideration of how we might contribute to the Kingdom’s actual <em class="calibre8">shape</em>. To make this move takes some imaginative effort. This is because the Kingdom is not something realistic or self-evident. It is fundamentally impractical, defying the realities of our daily existence. It represents, as I have said, not simply a “tweaking” of this world, but a world that is altogether different from everything we know.</p>
<p class="indent">Every time we pray the Lord’s Prayer, we remember and profess our hope that God’s Kingdom will come. So confident are we that this will happen that we even demand it. “God’s Kingdom come!” we cry, following up with: “Thy will be done.” To be people of a hope that is not escapist is to insist on jumping in and contributing to its realization. All of us probably agree that it is harder to know and to live according to God’s will than we might have hoped. Most Christian believers have asked, on more than one occasion, “How do I know what God’s will is?” Consistent <a id="page_289" class="calibre7"></a>with the emphases in the prior chapter, the basic answer to this question assumed here is: “We know what God’s will is when and insofar as we participate in the desire of our gracious, loving God to bring God’s Kingdom to earth as it is in heaven.” Well. That makes it sound relatively simple. Except, of course, that we know it is not. “But how, exactly, do we participate in the desire of God?” we ask. “How do we participate so deeply and freely in the life and work of God that our doing of God’s will is simply an extension of our participation?”</p>
<p class="indent">Building on our discussion of “hope and imagination” in <a href="chapter09.xhtml" class="calibre7">chapter 9</a>, I suggest that one path to the kind of deep participation in the life of God that gives way to the doing of God’s will is <em class="calibre8">imagining</em> God’s Kingdom. In the context of our imagining the Kingdom God desires, I believe, the Holy Spirit forms us into doers of God’s will. In short, our imagination serves as a vehicle through which the Spirit works to facilitate our participation in the promises, grace, and love of God in such a way that God’s desires become our desires, and our desires break forth into concrete actions that advance the coming of the Kingdom. I have in mind, in relation to this, the first two verses of Romans 12. Here, Paul exhorts us to “present our bodies as living sacrifices,” to resist “being conformed to the world,” and to be “transformed by the renewing of our minds.” It is right here that I see imagination in play. Through imagining the Kingdom of God (“setting our minds on things above”), our minds are “renewed.” And it is at this point, precisely, that “we discern what is the will of God—what is good and acceptable and perfect.”<a id="rch10en7" class="calibre7"></a><sup class="calibre12"><a href="notes.xhtml#ch10en7" class="calibre5">7</a></sup></p>
<p class="indent">I realize that talk of “imagination” will raise some suspicions. First, we might understandably say, doesn’t imagination concern itself with the “not real”? The last thing we, as people who hold faith, want to do is portray the Kingdom of God as that which is a nice idea, an inspiring metaphor, but not something that will actually come to be. Too often, in the history of Christendom, eschatological concepts have been misused to establish not-real imaginary worlds in which people can “escape” from the painful realities of the “real” world. Allow me, therefore, to be very clear about <a id="page_290" class="calibre7"></a>this: when I talk about imagining the Kingdom of God, I am not advocating we imagine a world that is fun and inspiring but will never come to be. I am recommending, in fact, that we imagine a Kingdom that is both future and present, a world that is at the same time both the Kingdom of God that is coming to be and the “real reality” that contrasts, even now, to this painful world that is not our home.<a id="rch10en8" class="calibre7"></a><sup class="calibre12"><a href="notes.xhtml#ch10en8" class="calibre5">8</a></sup> The kind of imagining I have in mind, unlike the kind Christopher Robin engages until he is six (when he becomes too old for such frivolity) is not devoted to creating worlds that will not, and do not, actually exist. The Kingdom of God is not an imaginary place in which not-real talking animals get stuck in honey pots, rescue each other from the “rain rain rain” that comes “down down down,”<a id="rch10en9" class="calibre7"></a><sup class="calibre12"><a href="notes.xhtml#ch10en9" class="calibre5">9</a></sup> or make last-minute plans for birthday parties. The kind of imagining I have in mind is not the kind we should grow out of, as we become more conscious of, and responsible for, the realities of this world. Of course we do grow out of it, too often, as our exposure to the world’s atrocities render us increasingly hopeless and cynical. But this is a bad thing, we hold, as people of faith. And so we work at the Table to revive our imagining; to recapture the Kingdom we claim is real; to remember our real home is characterized by all receiving bread, and all living in reconciled relationship, and none succumbing to temptation. While such imagining is, in one sense, at least as far-fetched as imagining Winnie-the-Pooh and the Hundred Acre Wood, it is grounded in the promises, grace, and love of God and not in our own wishes and desires. It is imagination that participates in the reality of God rather than advancing our own projected realities.</p>
<p class="indent">There is a second, related objection we might have to thinking about accessing the hope of our faith by way of “imagination.” In short, we are worried that “imagining” the Kingdom of God will lead to the creation of idols. What is to prevent our imaginations from running amok, from leading us to create and desire worlds that are of our own making, rather than God’s making? What is to ensure our imaginations don’t pull us away from the reality of the Kingdom of God, as God has established it, toward trumped-up versions of kingdoms of this world? Certainly, a quick survey of history uncovers example after example of earthly Kingdoms formed <a id="page_291" class="calibre7"></a>through the exercise of imagination. Some of these kingdoms have preserved and advanced life as much as possible, but not completely; most have expended the life of some to benefit the lives of others who are more powerful; none are the Kingdom of God in which <em class="calibre8">all</em> have life and <em class="calibre8">none</em> are expended for the sake of others.</p>
<p class="indent">What ensures our imaginations will not lead us to create kingdoms of this world, but rather contribute to the real reality of the Kingdom of God, is attentiveness to starting point. Our starting point for imagining (and our ending point, for that matter!) is God. What we are imagining is not first and foremost what <em class="calibre8">we</em> desire, but what <em class="calibre8">God</em> desires. What we are envisioning is not the most fabulous kingdom that would be possible <em class="calibre8">if</em> this world granted us more resources and certain superpowers, but the Kingdom that is not of this world, that is qualitatively different from this world, that is of the God who is <em class="calibre8">totaliter aliter</em> (“totally other”) than this world. We are, in fact, imagining that which is beyond anything we can imagine, because it belongs to the one “who is able to do far beyond all that we could ask or imagine by his power at work within us.”<a id="rch10en10" class="calibre7"></a><sup class="calibre12"><a href="notes.xhtml#ch10en10" class="calibre5">10</a></sup> The imagining I am talking about here is imagining founded in that one who has claimed us as God’s children: the one who makes outlandish promises, the one who continuously remakes and restores us, the one whose love is poured out and into us so fully that it spills over into works of love.</p>
<p class="indent">Calvin, I believe, had precisely this kind of imagining in mind when he instructed people of faith to “proclaim the majesty of God.” He honestly thought this should be the agenda of every sermon, of every Christian education class, and of every confession of faith we make in the context of private conversations. When speaking with members of the “visible church” (those who know their election in Jesus Christ)—<em class="calibre8">proclaim the majesty of God</em>. When speaking with those who might very well be participants in the “invisible church” (those who are not yet cognizant of their election)—<em class="calibre8">proclaim the majesty of God</em>. We are called to proclaim the majesty of God, according to Calvin, both to edify the established Christian community and to evangelize those who might one day become members of it. It is his firm conviction, in fact, that as we bear witness to God’s <a id="page_292" class="calibre7"></a>majesty, the Holy Spirit draws hearers more deeply into participation in the life and work of God.</p>
<p class="indent">We gave some consideration, in the preceding chapter, to how Calvin employs imagination in his proclamation of the divine majesty. Again, he does not imagine his way from himself to God. Rather, he begins with God’s self-revelation, contemplating God’s acts playfully and joyously. Calvin writes about God’s actions on our behalf as though he is a kid in a candy store. He insists, for example, that “there is not one blade of grass, there is no color in this world that is not intended to make us rejoice”<a id="rch10en11" class="calibre7"></a><sup class="calibre12"><a href="notes.xhtml#ch10en11" class="calibre5">11</a></sup> and that therefore we are “not only to be spectators in this beautiful theater but to enjoy the vast bounty and variety of good things which are displayed to us in it.”<a id="rch10en12" class="calibre7"></a><sup class="calibre12"><a href="notes.xhtml#ch10en12" class="calibre5">12</a></sup> Reveling in the bounty that is God’s gift to us, Calvin watches a nanny speaking tenderly to a baby and imaginatively proclaims the majesty of God: God, our loving caretaker, “lisps” to us. Borrowing a creative quote from Gregory of Nazianzus, Calvin testifies to the majesty of the Trinity. “I cannot think on the one without quickly being encircled by the splendor of the three”; he cites, “nor can I discern the three without being straightway carried back to the one.”<a id="rch10en13" class="calibre7"></a><sup class="calibre12"><a href="notes.xhtml#ch10en13" class="calibre5">13</a></sup> In these three quotes alone we witness Calvin bursting with imagination: celebrating grass and colors, identifying the world as the theater of God’s glory, envisioning God as the nanny who speaks baby talk to us, and utilizing Gregory’s majestic imagery to make the important theological point that there is “distinction, but not . . . division” in the life of the triune God.<a id="rch10en14" class="calibre7"></a><sup class="calibre12"><a href="notes.xhtml#ch10en14" class="calibre5">14</a></sup></p>
<p class="indent">Calvin’s creative proclamation of the majesty of God, I believe, is grounded in his conscious participation in the life of the God who meets us, makes us, blesses us, and sends us to share with the world. In other words, his imaginative language is not one strategic element in a system he employs to be a more winsome theologian or a more effective preacher. I’m certain he does not have, stacked on the corner of his desk, a pile of books instructing him on how to use catchy, marketable language to captivate one’s congregation or audience.<a id="rch10en15" class="calibre7"></a><sup class="calibre12"><a href="notes.xhtml#ch10en15" class="calibre5">15</a></sup> Rather, Calvin’s imaginative language itself both extends from and bears witness to his participation in the life and work of God. Calvin proclaims the majesty of God as one who reflects habitually on his relationship to God; in the context of his <a id="page_293" class="calibre7"></a>life of prayer he imagines what it is that God desires, both for himself and for this world. And he comes to participate ever more deeply in it, in such a way that God’s desires, by the power of the Spirit at work within him, continuously form—and correct—his own.</p>
<p class="indent">And Calvin’s participation in the work and will of God, facilitated by such imagining, then gives way to world-changing action. Submitting to the exhortations of a Christian brother,<a id="rch10en16" class="calibre7"></a><sup class="calibre12"><a href="notes.xhtml#ch10en16" class="calibre5">16</a></sup> he tears himself away from his safe circumstances and goes to Geneva; he writes the <em class="calibre8">Institutes</em> and the treatises of the Reformation; his prose contributes to the shaping of modern French. He supports separation of church and state<a id="rch10en17" class="calibre7"></a><sup class="calibre12"><a href="notes.xhtml#ch10en17" class="calibre5">17</a></sup> and advocates for more humane methods of criminal punishment.<a id="rch10en18" class="calibre7"></a><sup class="calibre12"><a href="notes.xhtml#ch10en18" class="calibre5">18</a></sup> He makes such strong provision for education that his vision extends to the Western world. Concerned to minimize the possibility of disease in the city of Geneva, he is also largely responsible for the installation of a closed sewer system.<a id="rch10en19" class="calibre7"></a><sup class="calibre12"><a href="notes.xhtml#ch10en19" class="calibre5">19</a></sup> All these things Calvin accomplishes, it seems, with an eye toward the coming Kingdom of God, never forgetting that “grace alone brings about every good work in us.”<a id="rch10en20" class="calibre7"></a><sup class="calibre12"><a href="notes.xhtml#ch10en20" class="calibre5">20</a></sup></p>
<p class="indent">If Calvin’s example of how to do justice in the world without wavering one iota from a God-centered theology isn’t enough to license the use of our imagination, consider the example of Jesus. Jesus has the habit of using whatever is ready at hand to proclaim the majesty of God, inviting others to participate so fully in it that their very participation contributes to its coming. Jesus encourages a Samaritan woman to deepen in her faith by referencing something she needs, and she carries, every day—a bucket of water.<a id="rch10en21" class="calibre7"></a><sup class="calibre12"><a href="notes.xhtml#ch10en21" class="calibre5">21</a></sup> The woman begins to <em class="calibre8">imagine</em> never again having to draw or to drink. Jesus invites a religious leader named Nicodemus to think of spiritual renewal in terms of the everyday occurrence of childbirth. Nicodemus begins imagining what it would be like to be born again.<a id="rch10en22" class="calibre7"></a><sup class="calibre12"><a href="notes.xhtml#ch10en22" class="calibre5">22</a></sup> Jesus challenges the disciples to feed those who are hungry with what is ready at hand.<a id="rch10en23" class="calibre7"></a><sup class="calibre12"><a href="notes.xhtml#ch10en23" class="calibre5">23</a></sup> He calls them to <em class="calibre8">imagine</em> that the contents of the lunchbox of one little boy can feed all those people.</p>
<p class="indent">Now, we know that the Samaritan woman was a good imaginer, and that her capacity to trust Jesus (to imagine and to believe that what he was saying was true) led her, in turn, to proclaim the good news to her <a id="page_294" class="calibre7"></a>townspeople. Unrelenting in her insistence that they “come and see” this one who tells her “everything I’ve done,”<a id="rch10en24" class="calibre7"></a><sup class="calibre12"><a href="notes.xhtml#ch10en24" class="calibre5">24</a></sup> the townspeople finally give in, eventually testifying that they have come to believe, “for we have heard for ourselves.”<a id="rch10en25" class="calibre7"></a><sup class="calibre12"><a href="notes.xhtml#ch10en25" class="calibre5">25</a></sup></p>
<p class="indent">Nicodemus and the disciples do not appear as able as the Samaritan woman to imagine the Kingdom in which Jesus is inviting them to participate. Nicodemus and Jesus apparently part ways, on the night after they have the conversation about being “born again,” with Nicodemus appearing still to be deeply skeptical.<a id="rch10en26" class="calibre7"></a><sup class="calibre12"><a href="notes.xhtml#ch10en26" class="calibre5">26</a></sup> But he goes on to make two additional appearances in the Gospel of John, both which indicate he is stepping out of the kingdoms of this world and into the Kingdom of God. First, in <a href="chapter07.xhtml" class="calibre7">chapter 7</a>, he reminds his fellow Saducees, and the temple police, that Jewish law “doesn’t judge someone without first hearing him and learning what he is doing.”<a id="rch10en27" class="calibre7"></a><sup class="calibre12"><a href="notes.xhtml#ch10en27" class="calibre5">27</a></sup> Second, in chapter 19, he assists Joseph of Arimathea in removing Jesus’s body from the cross, embalming it, and burying it in Joseph’s own, newly hewn tomb. Joseph, it seems, provided the tomb and the linen. Nicodemus, for his part, provided the spices—seventy pounds of myrrh and aloe. Like Mary before him, his gift is excessive.<a id="rch10en28" class="calibre7"></a><sup class="calibre12"><a href="notes.xhtml#ch10en28" class="calibre5">28</a></sup> Because Nicodemus (alongside Joseph) is able to imagine a different reality than the one in which Jesus is nailed to the cross, Jesus’s body is not left on the cross to decay, but is taken down and treated respectfully.</p>
<p class="indent">Like Nicodemus, the disciples find it difficult to imagine that God’s desire for the people surrounding them might actually be realized. Concerned that the time for the evening meal is drawing nigh, they urge Jesus to recommend they break for the evening so individual families can go into town and buy food for themselves. They recognize they do not have the resources to feed such a large crowd of people—in one Gospel, they note it would take six months’ salary to buy enough bread for every person to have just a taste.<a id="rch10en29" class="calibre7"></a><sup class="calibre12"><a href="notes.xhtml#ch10en29" class="calibre5">29</a></sup> But Jesus insists the disciples find a way to host the people. While each of the Gospel accounts suggests the disciples receive Jesus’s plan with skepticism, they in no evident way resist his concrete instructions. They collect the bread and the fish, they organize the people into picnic groups, and they have enough faith not to turn on their heels and walk away from the scene, scandalized by the absurdity of it all. They <a id="page_295" class="calibre7"></a>have enough faith, it seems, to begin imagining what they clearly know is unimaginable.</p>
<p class="indent">Each of these figures in different ways shows us what it looks like actively to live into the Kingdom of God. The Samaritan woman imagines the living water Jesus tells her about, and is drawn through the work of the Spirit into deeper participation in the life of God. Her imagining gives way to action: she goes back to her town and does the work of an evangelist, insisting that her townspeople come and see this one she has met,<a id="rch10en30" class="calibre7"></a><sup class="calibre12"><a href="notes.xhtml#ch10en30" class="calibre5">30</a></sup> to participate in relationship to him, and to enter into the fellowship of the Kingdom. Interestingly, the passage makes a big point of telling us that the townspeople are moved to trek out to the well and meet Jesus specifically by the woman’s compelling testimony that “he told me everything I’ve ever done.”<a id="rch10en31" class="calibre7"></a><sup class="calibre12"><a href="notes.xhtml#ch10en31" class="calibre5">31</a></sup> Clearly, this woman is not only good at accepting Jesus’s invitation to imagine; she is also herself gifted at inviting others to imagine with her. “Could this man be the Christ?” she asks.<a id="rch10en32" class="calibre7"></a><sup class="calibre12"><a href="notes.xhtml#ch10en32" class="calibre5">32</a></sup> She draws them in; they can’t resist; they go to the well; they meet Jesus; and <em class="calibre8">then</em> they come to believe because they have “heard for ourselves.”<a id="rch10en33" class="calibre7"></a><sup class="calibre12"><a href="notes.xhtml#ch10en33" class="calibre5">33</a></sup></p>
<p class="indent">Nicodemus continues to reflect on what Jesus has told him; the imaginative “born again” imagery is used by the Holy Spirit to draw him even more deeply into relationship to God through his relationship to Jesus himself. I like to think that Nicodemus’s ongoing engagement with the beautiful and truthful metaphor of Jesus gave way, finally, to his participation in the work of the Kingdom. His giving of the spices and participation in the embalming and burial, I think, certainly serve to promote justice on at least three levels. First, he who is presumably well off (financially speaking) shares his wealth with Jesus, a man who is (economically) poor. He cares for the Good Teacher whom many dearly loved, the Teacher through whom he comes to participate in life eternal. In providing for the care of Jesus’s body, he participates in Jesus’s ministry to bodies that thirst, and hunger, and groan for the completion of their redemption. In caring for Jesus, Nicodemus makes an actual contribution to the coming of the Kingdom. He quite literally tends the body that will rise again on Sunday, walk and talk and eat with the disciples, ascend to heaven to sit on the right hand of the Father, and come again to take us <a id="page_296" class="calibre7"></a>to himself.<a id="rch10en34" class="calibre7"></a><sup class="calibre12"><a href="notes.xhtml#ch10en34" class="calibre5">34</a></sup> In caring for Jesus’s body, Nicodemus is participating in the resurrection that has not even happened yet. He is living into, and thereby advancing, the new life Jesus has told him about.</p>
<p class="indent">And then there are those concerned, practical, initially unimaginative disciples. I try to fathom what must have run through their heads as they handed Jesus the five loaves and two fishes. They must have been expecting him to shake his head, woefully, as he agreed with them that it was time to bring the evening to a close. Instead, Jesus instructs them to have the people sit down for a meal. I tell you what—something had to have shifted, in the disciples, when Jesus gave them this instruction. Something led the disciples from thinking <em class="calibre8">obviously we can’t feed them</em> to <em class="calibre8">let’s all sit down, now, and get ready to eat</em>. The way I see it, you have to have some imagination operative if you are going to have the guts to run around organizing five thousand plus people for a meal that is, for all intents and purposes, nonexistent. You have to have some hope that this man who has been healing bodies and teaching bodies can also feed bodies out of nothing. To have such hope is at least to have a glimpse of the Kingdom in sight: the wedding table of the Lamb around which all are gathered, at which all are fed, at which none go hungry. And the disciples clearly helped them bring this Kingdom to earth, as it is in heaven, with their organizing and collecting. In their imagining, which enables them to participate, they contribute to bringing it into being.</p>
<h3 class="h2">V<small class="calibre3">OCATION</small>, M<small class="calibre3">ISSION, AND</small> R<small class="calibre3">ISK</small></h3>
<p class="indent">We’ve mentioned Barth’s thinking that “if we think there is no other way” than to be stressed out, “we are always wrong.” To think it is OK to put off imagining what God is calling us to, for a time, so we can get all our other stuff done, is to deny the sovereignty of God. It is to neglect the freedom we have to act courageously and take creative risks precisely because God is in charge of it all. To do, do, do all the time is—in a <a id="page_297" class="calibre7"></a>sense—to imagine we make it all happen. To do the Word of God—by contrast—is to remember it is God who is in charge.</p>
<p class="indent">When we prioritize getting a lot of stuff done over hearing God’s Word and doing it, we miss out on participating in God’s mission in the world.</p>
<p class="indent">I once heard Allan Boesak speak along these lines.<a id="rch10en35" class="calibre7"></a><sup class="calibre12"><a href="notes.xhtml#ch10en35" class="calibre5">35</a></sup> Allan Boesak is a black African theologian who helped fight apartheid in South Africa. What Boesak said in his lecture took me off guard, a bit. He said that, if you miss the chance to do God’s Word, you’ve missed it. The chance will never come back.</p>
<p class="indent">“Huh?” I asked him, in a luncheon discussion following the discussion, a dreadful ache growing in my stomach.</p>
<p class="indent">And here is my paraphrase of his life-changing reply: “We have to be ready to hear God’s Word and do it, or we will miss doing it. You Americans think God’s Word will wait for you until you’re ready to obey. You treat it the same way you treat ideals like ‘liberty and justice.’ Like they will always be there. You take them for granted. But it is important that American Christians learn that the transformative work God is calling us to do will not always be available. We must be ready to hear, and ready to act, or it will be gone.”</p>
<p class="indent">My mind raced to how the Scripture describes the character of God’s Word. God’s Word isn’t static, we believe. It is “living, active, and sharper than any two-edged sword.” It is steadfast and unchanging, but it is—at the same time—living and dynamic. It keeps on meeting us, ever-anew, in each particular moment, in each particular situation, in very particular ways. When we preach (or listen to preaching), we’re trying to discern and bear witness to the word’s particular shape, to us as particular people, in this particular moment. The word doesn’t just hang out in here. It’s not hunkered down in a corner pew, inviting us to come by and chat “whenever”: whenever we are not busy. Actually, the Word is the one who is busiest of all; the Word is doing; the Word is working to make all things new. We listen for it, we hear it, and then—then!—is the moment to join in the doing. Creating all things, showing Abram the stars, leading the Shunammite woman to build Elisha a shelter; entering the womb of the virgin, eating with tax collectors and sinners, suffering on that cross. Sending the <a id="page_298" class="calibre7"></a>Spirit, coming again—the Word has entered our history not in general, not in the abstract, but in flesh and in blood and in time and in space and with us and in the now. Right now. Will we hear it? Will we do it? Can we clear away our doing, so we can be doers of the Word, even now? Or will we turn again from the mirror, forgetting? Missing the opportunity for our doing, burned out by our own inside-out hypocrisy? <a id="rch10en36" class="calibre7"></a><sup class="calibre12"><a href="notes.xhtml#ch10en36" class="calibre5">36</a></sup></p>
<p class="indent">As Boesak spoke, that ache in my belly became identifiable grief as I faced the reality that I have been so busy doing, at times, that I have forgotten to be an imaginer of the Kingdom and a doer of the very Word I have heard and even, myself, proclaimed.</p>
<p class="indent">Without taking away his hard point, Boesak helped by gently explaining that, in his observation, we American Christians are so caught up in doing that we are not positioned to hear the specific things God is saying to us and calling us to do. Christians are as consumeristic, he said, as the rest of our culture—so obsessed with trying to make something of ourselves and our churches that we miss what God is trying to make us into.</p>
<p class="indent">He told a story<a id="rch10en37" class="calibre7"></a><sup class="calibre12"><a href="notes.xhtml#ch10en37" class="calibre5">37</a></sup> of when he once let an opportunity go by, when he and his colleagues heard the Word, but did not do it. He explained that there was a moment when he and his colleagues could have voted to reunite the Dutch Reformed Church in South Africa, but that they didn’t call for the vote because they thought there might be a better time, a time that was more politically expedient. But things got worse, and there was not the chance to call for such a vote again. Not acting in that moment, when they had the opportunity, meant that there would not be another chance for at least a generation, Boesak insisted. He exhorted us to be ready, today, for whatever God calls us to do.</p>
<h3 class="h2">V<small class="calibre3">OCATION AND</small> T<small class="calibre3">HIS</small> M<small class="calibre3">OMENT</small></h3>
<p class="indent">Boesak’s words still scare me. I am afraid we are missing opportunities to gain life because we are afraid of losing it. I am afraid not only that we will hesitate in some future “big” moment when we are asked to sacrifice, but that we are already hesitating, for the sake of being politically <a id="page_299" class="calibre7"></a>expedient, for the sake of keeping everything in equilibrium. Again, being politically savvy and keeping things in equilibrium are important values, until they keep us from doing what God would have us do. Are our “right answers” keeping us from doing the will of God?</p>
<p class="indent">What sense can we make of <em class="calibre8">this moment</em>, as a moment of discipleship? What are we being called upon to do and to be right now, today? For it is right now—today—that the Messiah asks us to join him in doing power differently, in hoping against hope, and in holding nothing back for the sake of those whom God so loves. It is not that the moment might come, or even is definitely coming, at some point. That moment is here, in some particular way we need to ascertain. Will we let it pass by, or will we respond? Will we go with Jesus, or will he rebuke us—we who are the rocks, we who are among his beloved? Will we join in what God is doing in the world, or will we cling so fiercely to the understandings we have cobbled for ourselves that we don’t even see the cross we are supposed to carry? Will we join in with what God is up to, or will we just get in the way? What we have to gain are lives that participate in a world that is new; in the world God promises; in a world that is wide and free; in a world where everyone is included and all tears have been wiped away.</p>
<h3 class="h2">T<small class="calibre3">HE</small> H<small class="calibre3">ARD</small> A<small class="calibre3">CTUALITY</small></h3>
<p class="indent">In every era, people have experienced crises in faith. Our time is no different, though our crises have, as all crises do, particular shapes.</p>
<p class="indent">Globally, we have lost confidence that we know what to do to keep people safe and healthy. All around the world, there are people who start every day by picking up a newspaper and scanning it for the latest terrorist attack. We breathe air that is impacted by pollution, we absorb sun’s rays made dangerous by the erosion of our atmosphere, and we are surrounded by chemicals our bodies work to manage until they succumb to cancers or other diseases. Too many people are hungry; too many are homeless; too many are incarcerated; too many lack basic medical care. Even our identities <a id="page_300" class="calibre7"></a>are at risk, susceptible to cyberattacks that, we are told, are becoming a kind of “new normal.” We grope for ways to survive, but whatever efforts we can take seem to pale in comparison to the threats that surround us.</p>
<p class="indent">Nationally, many Americans have lost all faith in political leadership. The common perception is that this crisis is bipartisan—there is a failure on all sides to represent, to care for, to work together, to tell the truth, to look out for those most in need. There is an unwillingness even to listen to the voices of others and a kind of insistence on operating according to fears based in destructive stereotypes. There has been, of late, a resurgence of concern about ongoing racism and sexism. This is in one way a hopeful thing, but it is also painful to realize that those we have until recently held in high respect have been living lies, engaging in acts of violence and profound disrespect that have done great damage both to other human beings and to our world at large.</p>
<p class="indent">Ecclesially, as we have discussed, there is a crisis in faith in organized religions and religious institutions. This is related to our global and national faith crises, since churches often reflect and have a hand in shaping the dynamics of culture. As we have discussed, a particular form the current faith crisis is taking, as described by the growing numbers of the Dones as well as the Nones, is that Christians claim to be different from the world and then actually are not. As Letty Russell once put it, instead of being “in the world and not of it,” as the New Testament instructs, Christians are “of the world but not in it.”<a id="rch10en38" class="calibre7"></a><sup class="calibre12"><a href="notes.xhtml#ch10en38" class="calibre5">38</a></sup> This crisis of faith is articulated in the form of testimony to an experience of betrayal: the Nones were once hoping people of faith would model a different way of being, believing this is what they had promised. But people of faith failed to come through, they say, as witnesses to a way of being that honors all life.<a id="rch10en39" class="calibre7"></a><sup class="calibre12"><a href="notes.xhtml#ch10en39" class="calibre5">39</a></sup></p>
<p class="indent">In each of these spheres, there is a great deal of fear. Fear that we are not safe; fear there is very little we can do to ensure the safety of others. Fear that, no matter how hard we work, it will be impossible to advance—economically or socially. Fear that we are losing ground, in relation to power, influence, wealth and numbers. Fear that, if we risk opening ourselves up to new people and possibilities, the dissipating cache we have left will be lost.</p>
<p class="indent"><a id="page_301" class="calibre7"></a>Given all this, I recognize that to imagine a single book can make a difference is a pretty big stretch. But I do believe there are certain ideas—I would even say truths—that can change everything when we hold onto them, in faith, in the midst of crisis. My greatest hope is that you have found even just one such idea in this book. For me, the most transformative ideas of all are that we have been met by a God who has entered into existence with us, and we are lifted up by this God into the ongoing work of being made and making, of being blessed and blessing, and of being sent to be with and for one another even as God is with and for us. I try to hold on to these ideas as the framing reality of my life and all lives, but (as discussed in <a href="chapter08.xhtml" class="calibre7">chapter 8</a>), it can be difficult not to let them slip out of head and heart.</p>
<p class="indent">When our faith is shaped and reshaped by the truths that have sustained our forebears through the ages, we gain a “new capacity” for living in relation to the circumstances around us, according to Barth. This new capacity is, in fact, faith itself—gifted to us by God as an overflow of grace. While faith does not exempt us from circumstances, it does release us from incapacitating fear. It can free us, Barth says, “from any fear of the world or life or sin or hell.”<a id="rch10en40" class="calibre7"></a><sup class="calibre12"><a href="notes.xhtml#ch10en40" class="calibre5">40</a></sup> How? By keeping our “gaze firmly fixed on Jesus” who has “overcome the world.”<a id="rch10en41" class="calibre7"></a><sup class="calibre12"><a href="notes.xhtml#ch10en41" class="calibre5">41</a></sup> The surprise twist on all this is that Barth is not referring, this time, to Jesus Christ overcoming the world by way of the cross, resurrection, and ascension. He is reminding us that Jesus also overcame the world, on a day-to-day basis and before all the eyes that were present to see, through the performance of miracles.</p>
<p class="indent">I find it helpful to think of faith as a “new capacity,” a manifestation of God’s grace, in this difficult world, that is nothing short of miraculous. And what is so appealing about the miracle of faith is that it is not something “out of this world,” standing at a distance from everyday life. As Jesus’s miracles occurred in the middle of crowds, or conflicts, or terrible pain or walks on a beach, so our capacious faith is exercised, and can and will be exercised, in the context of this teeming, dangerous, fearful world that surrounds us.</p>
<p class="indent">Allow me to close with a brief exhortation, as we together seek to hold on to this new capacity, this miracle that is faith.</p>
<h3 class="h2"><a id="page_302" class="calibre5"></a>D<small class="calibre3">ARING</small> F<small class="calibre3">AITH</small></h3>
<p class="indent">The day before I graduated with my PhD, the then-president of Princeton Seminary looked me straight in the eye and made a startling remark. “You’ll never again know as much as you know right now,” he said. “I trust that you’ll get a lot wiser,” he said. “But you’ll never know more.” As my understanding of what it means and why it matters to know things has changed over the years, I believe I’ve experienced what he meant.</p>
<p class="indent">You are finishing this book knowing a lot, with a lot to hold on to.</p>
<p class="indent">The most important thing I’m hoping you know is that Christianity teaches that God is not simply God in general, but the God who chose us, who loves us, who will never let us go. Now, this is the kind of knowing you may have had since you were a child and feel you have basically held on to, in the course of all your theological escapades. Or it may be something you just can’t buy into, given the state of the world or your skepticism about an omnipotent God paying attention to particular persons. Most of us likely fall somewhere between these two ways of describing ourselves—sometimes confident in God’s presence; sometimes skeptical that it is as real as we want it to be.</p>
<p class="indent">The psalmists, by and large, seem to share the “up and down” experience of holding faith. One of the things they tell us is that knowing the God of all is also our God takes a lifetime of attention. We need to take the effort to <em class="calibre8">be still</em> in order to know again. And again. “Be still, and know that I am God.”<a id="rch10en42" class="calibre7"></a><sup class="calibre12"><a href="notes.xhtml#ch10en42" class="calibre5">42</a></sup> We talked, in this book, about how difficult this can be in twenty-first-century American culture. It is no easy thing, in this crazy-busy world, to create time and space for stillness. It’s hard enough not to check our texts in the course of a worship service, never mind being still enough to experience knowledge of God in an altogether new way.</p>
<p class="indent">Acknowledging that holding faith can be kind of a “roller coaster” experience, I’m hoping you are ending this book with a commitment to staying on the train, seeking ever to know and re-know who God is and what God is up to in the world. Again, the specifics of what God desires are not always easy to ascertain, and there is always the chance we who think we know them have misunderstood and will have to be corrected in <a id="page_303" class="calibre7"></a>our understanding, seeking again. But there are things we do know: God is with us. We are loved and forgiven. God is opposed to all injustices. God’s Kingdom will come, and people of faith are included in the work that will bring it. Paul, in his letter to the Romans, talks about people who hold faith “being transformed by the renewal of their minds.”<a id="rch10en43" class="calibre7"></a><sup class="calibre12"><a href="notes.xhtml#ch10en43" class="calibre5">43</a></sup> If being still creates a context for re-knowing God, renewing our minds carves a space for knowing God’s will so we can go out into the world and help to make it so.</p>
<p class="indent">In the final analysis, people who hold tight to the faith that embraces them are never done gathering knowledge. This is because they are in the business of bearing witness to a God who is known, in each moment, ever-anew. The learning continues; and I mean not only experiential learning. I mean book learning. I mean focused theological, liturgical, exegetical study. I mean the kind of study that leads us to be still. I mean the kind of study that creates sacred spaces for us to think, to contemplate, and to re-know the somethings that matter to everything: that God meets us and continues to make us, that God desires to bless every life and the life of the world, and that God sends us to share all that is meaningful with one another.</p>
</body>
</html>
