<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>Holding Faith</title>
    <meta content="urn:uuid:e0000000-0000-0000-0000-000004415877" name="Adept.expected.resource"/>
    <meta http-equiv="Content-Type" content="text/html; charset=utf-8"/>
  <link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="../../stylesheet.css"/>
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="../../page_styles.css"/>
</head>
  <body class="calibre">
<p class="copyc"><a id="page_iv" class="calibre7"></a>HOLDING FAITH:<br class="calibre1"/>A PRACTICAL INTRODUCTION TO CHRISTIAN DOCTRINE</p>
<p class="copyct"><em class="calibre8">Copyright © 2018 by Abingdon Press</em></p>
<p class="copyt">All rights reserved.</p>
<p class="copyt">No part of this work may be reproduced or transmitted in any form or by any means, electronic or mechanical, including photocopying and recording, or by any information storage or retrieval system, except as may be expressly permitted by the 1976 Copyright Act or in writing from the publisher. Requests for permission should be addressed in writing to Permissions, Abingdon Press, 2222 Rosa L. Parks Blvd., Nashville, TN 37228-1306, or emailed to <a href="mailto:permissions@abingdonpress.com" class="calibre7">permissions@abingdonpress.com</a>.</p>
<p class="copyct"><em class="calibre8">This book is printed on acid-free paper</em>.</p>
<p class="copyct"><strong class="calibre9">Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data has been requested.</strong></p>
<p class="copyct">978-1-4267-5814-0</p>
<p class="copyt">Scripture quotations unless noted otherwise are taken from the Common English Bible, copyright © 2011. Used by permission. All rights reserved.</p>
<p class="copyt">Scripture quotations marked KJV are from The Authorized (King James) Version. Rights in the Authorized Version in the United Kingdom are vested in the Crown. Reproduced by permission of the Crown’s patentee, Cambridge University Press.</p>
<p class="copyt">Scripture quotations marked NRSV are from the New Revised Standard Version Bible, copyright © 1989 National Council of the Churches of Christ in the United States of America. Used by permission. All rights reserved worldwide. <a href="http://nrsvbibles.org/" class="calibre7">http://nrsvbibles.org/</a>.</p>
<p class="copyt">Portions of <a href="chapter09.xhtml" class="calibre7">chapters 9</a> and <a href="chapter10.xhtml" class="calibre7">10</a> of this book originated in Cynthia L. Rigby, <em class="calibre8">Promotion of Social Righteousness</em> (Louisville: Witherspoon Press, 2009). Used by permission.</p>
<p class="copyct">Sources Frequently Cited</p>
<p class="copyt">Karl Barth, <em class="calibre8">Church Dogmatics</em>, 13 vols. (Edinburgh: T&amp;T Clark, 1975–2009).</p>
<p class="copyt">John Calvin, <em class="calibre8">Institutes of the Christian Religion</em>, 2 vols., ed. John T. McNeill (Philadelphia: Westminster, 1960).</p>
<p class="copyt1"><em class="calibre8">Glory to God</em> (Louisville: Westminster John Knox Press, 2013).</p>
<p class="copyc1">18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27—10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1<br class="calibre1"/>MANUFACTURED IN THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA</p>
</body>
</html>
