<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>Holding Faith</title>
    <meta content="urn:uuid:e0000000-0000-0000-0000-000004415877" name="Adept.expected.resource"/>
    <meta http-equiv="Content-Type" content="text/html; charset=utf-8"/>
  <link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="../../stylesheet.css"/>
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="../../page_styles.css"/>
</head>
  <body class="calibre">
<h2 class="h2z1"><a id="page_361" class="calibre5"></a><a id="ind1" class="calibre5"></a>N<small class="calibre11">AMES AND</small> T<small class="calibre11">OPICS</small> I<small class="calibre11">NDEX</small></h2>
<p class="noindentx">The index that appeared in the print version of this title was intentionally removed from the eBook. Please use the search function on your eReading device for terms of interest. For your reference, the terms that appear in the print index are listed below</p>
<p class="indexmain">Abélard</p>
<p class="indexmain">Abraham</p>
<p class="indexsub">Abram</p>
<p class="indexsub">and Isaac</p>
<p class="indexsub">stars in the sky</p>
<p class="indexmain">adoptionism</p>
<p class="indexsub">our adoption</p>
<p class="indexmain">analogical. <em class="calibre8">See</em> language about God</p>
<p class="indexmain">Anselm of Canterbury (Anselm)</p>
<p class="indexmain">apologetics</p>
<p class="indexmain"><em class="calibre8">apophatic</em> (<em class="calibre8">via negativa</em>)</p>
<p class="indexmain">Apostles’ Creed</p>
<p class="indexmain">Aquinas, Thomas (Aquinas, Saint Thomas Aquinas)</p>
<p class="indexmain">Arius</p>
<p class="indexmain">ascension</p>
<p class="indexmain">assurance of pardon</p>
<p class="indexmain">Athanasius</p>
<p class="indexmain">atonement</p>
<p class="indexmain">atonement theories. <em class="calibre8">See</em> salvation</p>
<p class="indexmain">Augustine (Augustine of Hippo, Saint Augustine)</p>
<p class="indexsub"><em class="calibre8">Confessions</em></p>
<p class="indexmain">Aulén, Gustaf</p>
<p class="indexmain">authority</p>
<p class="indexsub">biblical/scriptural</p>
<p class="indexsub">exercise on</p>
<p class="indexsub">interpretive</p>
<p class="indexmain1"><a id="page_362" class="calibre7"></a>baptism</p>
<p class="indexsub">baptismal renewal</p>
<p class="indexsub">infant/children baptism</p>
<p class="indexsub">Jesus’s</p>
<p class="indexmain">Barmen Declaration</p>
<p class="indexmain">Barth, Karl</p>
<p class="indexmain">Belhar Declaration</p>
<p class="indexmain">Bettenson, Henry</p>
<p class="indexmain">Bible (Scripture)</p>
<p class="indexsub">authority of</p>
<p class="indexsub">as norming norm</p>
<p class="indexsub">as spectacles/eyeglasses (definition)</p>
<p class="indexsub"><em class="calibre8">See also</em> interpretation</p>
<p class="indexmain">blood</p>
<p class="indexsub">in the Enuma Elish</p>
<p class="indexsub">in the sacrament</p>
<p class="indexmain">Blumenthal, David</p>
<p class="indexmain">bodies. <em class="calibre8">See also</em> sin, feminine</p>
<p class="indexsub">Antiochene school of thought</p>
<p class="indexsub">Jesus’s and the Lord’s Supper</p>
<p class="indexsub">and resurrection</p>
<p class="indexmain">Bonhoeffer, Dietrich</p>
<p class="indexmain">Book of Common Worship</p>
<p class="indexmain">Book of Confessions</p>
<p class="indexmain">Bouwsma, William</p>
<p class="indexmain">bridegroom (God/Christ as)</p>
<p class="indexmain">Brock, Rita Nakashima</p>
<p class="indexmain">Brown, Carole R.</p>
<p class="indexmain">Brown, David</p>
<p class="indexmain">Brown, Joanne Carlson</p>
<p class="indexmain">Buber, Martin</p>
<p class="indexmain1">Caldwell, Elizabeth</p>
<p class="indexmain">Calvin, John</p>
<p class="indexmain"><a id="page_363" class="calibre7"></a>Campolo, Tony</p>
<p class="indexmain">Cappadocian Fathers</p>
<p class="indexmain">Chalcedon</p>
<p class="indexsub">Alexandrian school of thought</p>
<p class="indexsub">Chaledonian Statement</p>
<p class="indexsub">distortion of</p>
<p class="indexsub">significance of</p>
<p class="indexmain">Charlie Brown</p>
<p class="indexmain">christocentrism</p>
<p class="indexmain">christology</p>
<p class="indexmain"><em class="calibre8">christus victor</em> theory of atonement</p>
<p class="indexmain"><em class="calibre8">chronos</em></p>
<p class="indexmain">church</p>
<p class="indexsub">and bodies</p>
<p class="indexsub">decline of</p>
<p class="indexsub">ecumenicity/visible unity</p>
<p class="indexsub">as home</p>
<p class="indexsub">on-line/virtual/avatar</p>
<p class="indexsub">as parable and promise</p>
<p class="indexsub">as sacrament</p>
<p class="indexsub">visible/invisible, <em class="calibre8">ekklesia/koinonia</em></p>
<p class="indexmain">communion</p>
<p class="indexsub">communion of saints</p>
<p class="indexsub">God’s with us</p>
<p class="indexsub">with others</p>
<p class="indexmain">concupiscence. <em class="calibre8">See</em> sin</p>
<p class="indexmain">Cone, James</p>
<p class="indexmain">confession</p>
<p class="indexsub">as belief</p>
<p class="indexsub">of creation <em class="calibre8">ex nihilo</em></p>
<p class="indexsub">of creeds</p>
<p class="indexsub">of every tongue</p>
<p class="indexsub">of sin (repentance)</p>
<p class="indexsub">of the triune God</p>
<p class="indexmain">corporate sin. <em class="calibre8">See</em> sin</p>
<p class="indexmain">Council of Constantinople</p>
<p class="indexmain">creation <em class="calibre8">ex nihilo</em></p>
<p class="indexsub">goodness of creation</p>
<p class="indexsub">process theology’s rejection of</p>
<p class="indexmain">cross (the). <em class="calibre8">See also</em> suffering</p>
<p class="indexsub">and abuse</p>
<p class="indexsub">and atonement</p>
<p class="indexsub">hope and</p>
<p class="indexsub">scandalous nature of</p>
<p class="indexmain1"><a id="page_364" class="calibre7"></a>Dabney, Robert Lewis</p>
<p class="indexmain">Dali, Salvador</p>
<p class="indexmain">Dante (Dante Alighieri)</p>
<p class="indexmain">da Vinci, Leonardo</p>
<p class="indexmain">declaration of forgiveness</p>
<p class="indexmain">de-creation</p>
<p class="indexsub">turning away from creation</p>
<p class="indexmain">depraved (total depravity)</p>
<p class="indexmain">de Rocchietti, Aracely</p>
<p class="indexmain">descriptive</p>
<p class="indexmain">dialectical tension</p>
<p class="indexmain">Dillard, Annie</p>
<p class="indexmain">doctrine (teachings)</p>
<p class="indexsub">abuse/ harm</p>
<p class="indexsub">relevance of, introduction <em class="calibre8">passim</em></p>
<p class="indexsub">“so-what” of</p>
<p class="indexmain">Donelson, Lewis</p>
<p class="indexmain">Dones. <em class="calibre8">See</em> Nones</p>
<p class="indexmain">double predestination</p>
<p class="indexmain1"><em class="calibre8">ekklesia</em></p>
<p class="indexmain">election</p>
<p class="indexmain">Enlightenment</p>
<p class="indexmain"><em class="calibre8">Enuma Elish</em></p>
<p class="indexmain">epistemology</p>
<p class="indexmain">equivocal. <em class="calibre8">See</em> language about God</p>
<p class="indexmain">eschatology. <em class="calibre8">See</em> hope, Christian</p>
<p class="indexmain">estrangement. <em class="calibre8">See</em> sin, as turning away</p>
<p class="indexmain">Evans, James</p>
<p class="indexmain">Eve and/or Adam</p>
<p class="indexmain">evil</p>
<p class="indexsub">Paul</p>
<p class="indexmain">evolution</p>
<p class="indexmain">existential risk</p>
<p class="indexmain"><em class="calibre8">ex nihilo. See</em> creation <em class="calibre8">ex nihilo</em></p>
<p class="indexmain1">faith</p>
<p class="indexsub">and Christian life, chap 8 <em class="calibre8">passim</em></p>
<p class="indexsub">crisis of</p>
<p class="indexsub">holding Christ</p>
<p class="indexsub">hope and imagination</p>
<p class="indexsub">as practical</p>
<p class="indexsub">seeking understanding</p>
<p class="indexsub">statements of</p>
<p class="indexmain">Fall (the)</p>
<p class="indexsub">fallen humanity</p>
<p class="indexsub">Satan as the fallen one</p>
<p class="indexmain">fellowship</p>
<p class="indexsub">trintarian</p>
<p class="indexmain">feminine sin</p>
<p class="indexmain"><em class="calibre8">fides quarens intellectum. See also</em> faith</p>
<p class="indexmain"><em class="calibre8">filioque. See also</em> Holy Spirit</p>
<p class="indexsub">council of Toledo</p>
<p class="indexsub">and ecumenical unity</p>
<p class="indexsub">Great Schism</p>
<p class="indexsub">history of addition to creed</p>
<p class="indexmain">finitude</p>
<p class="indexmain">forgiveness</p>
<p class="indexmain"><a id="page_365" class="calibre7"></a>four marks of the church</p>
<p class="indexmain">Frankenberry, Nancy K.</p>
<p class="indexmain">freedom</p>
<p class="indexsub">Calvin’s three freedoms</p>
<p class="indexsub">divine</p>
<p class="indexsub">human</p>
<p class="indexmain">friendship (divine)</p>
<p class="indexsub">we in relationship to the divine</p>
<p class="indexmain1">Gaventa, Beverly Roberts</p>
<p class="indexmain">Gilligan, Carolyn</p>
<p class="indexmain">God. <em class="calibre8">See also</em> communion; confession; freedom (divine); friendship (divine); humanity of; incarnation; Jesus revealing character of; Kingdom of; language about; mystery of; partnership; revelation</p>
<p class="indexsub">affected by us</p>
<p class="indexsub">anthropomorphism</p>
<p class="indexsub">and brokenness of world</p>
<p class="indexsub">divine immanence</p>
<p class="indexsub">divine transcendence</p>
<p class="indexsub">and evil</p>
<p class="indexsub">as father</p>
<p class="indexsub">good</p>
<p class="indexsub">as Ground of All Being</p>
<p class="indexsub">of history</p>
<p class="indexsub">immutable</p>
<p class="indexsub">impassible</p>
<p class="indexsub">love of</p>
<p class="indexsub">as mother</p>
<p class="indexsub">omnipotent</p>
<p class="indexsub">promise of</p>
<p class="indexsub">sovereignty of</p>
<p class="indexsub">as suffering</p>
<p class="indexsub">as <em class="calibre8">totaliter aliter</em></p>
<p class="indexmain">grace</p>
<p class="indexsub">cheap</p>
<p class="indexsub">order of grace</p>
<p class="indexsub">surplus</p>
<p class="indexmain">Grant, Jacquelyn</p>
<p class="indexmain">Gray, John</p>
<p class="indexmain">Great Schism</p>
<p class="indexmain">Greenway, William</p>
<p class="indexmain">Guthrie, Shirley</p>
<p class="indexmain">Gutiérrez, Gustavo</p>
<p class="indexmain1"><a id="page_366" class="calibre7"></a>Harry Potter</p>
<p class="indexmain">Hart, D. Bentley</p>
<p class="indexmain">Harvey, David</p>
<p class="indexmain">hermeneutic of suspicion. <em class="calibre8">See also</em> interpretation</p>
<p class="indexmain">Holy Spirit (Spirit)</p>
<p class="indexsub">and church</p>
<p class="indexsub">and <em class="calibre8">filioque</em></p>
<p class="indexsub">gathering, building up, sending forth</p>
<p class="indexsub">and revelation</p>
<p class="indexsub">in Trinity</p>
<p class="indexsub">in work of sanctifying</p>
<p class="indexmain"><em class="calibre8">homoiousios</em></p>
<p class="indexmain"><em class="calibre8">homoousios</em></p>
<p class="indexmain">hope, Christian</p>
<p class="indexsub">and eschatology</p>
<p class="indexsub">and the cross</p>
<p class="indexmain"><em class="calibre8">hubris. See</em> sin, pride</p>
<p class="indexmain">humanity</p>
<p class="indexsub">our dual nature</p>
<p class="indexsub">of God</p>
<p class="indexsub">Jesus’s</p>
<p class="indexmain">Hunsinger, George</p>
<p class="indexmain">hypocrisy</p>
<p class="indexmain"><em class="calibre8">hypostases</em></p>
<p class="indexmain1">idolatry</p>
<p class="indexmain">imagination</p>
<p class="indexmain">incarnation (the)</p>
<p class="indexsub">and birth</p>
<p class="indexsub">doctrine of</p>
<p class="indexsub">incarnational God</p>
<p class="indexsub">offense/scandal of</p>
<p class="indexmain">individualization</p>
<p class="indexmain">interpretation (of Scripture)</p>
<p class="indexsub">Calvin</p>
<p class="indexsub">christocentric</p>
<p class="indexsub">by communities</p>
<p class="indexsub">expansive</p>
<p class="indexsub">hermeneutic of suspicion</p>
<p class="indexmain">Irenaeus (Iraneus)</p>
<p class="indexmain">Ivory, Luther D.</p>
<p class="indexmain1">Jenkins, Jerry B.</p>
<p class="indexmain">Jesus (Jesus Christ, Christ)</p>
<p class="indexsub">as adopted</p>
<p class="indexsub">birth, baptism of</p>
<p class="indexsub">as bridegroom</p>
<p class="indexsub">enlivened by Spirit</p>
<p class="indexsub">fully human/divine</p>
<p class="indexsub"><em class="calibre8">homoousious</em> with the Father</p>
<p class="indexsub"><a id="page_367" class="calibre7"></a>humanity of</p>
<p class="indexsub">mystery of</p>
<p class="indexsub">offices of</p>
<p class="indexsub">as partner with us</p>
<p class="indexsub">as pre-existent Word</p>
<p class="indexsub">as present in the sacrament</p>
<p class="indexsub">redemption accomplished by</p>
<p class="indexsub">revealing character of God</p>
<p class="indexsub">suffering of</p>
<p class="indexsub">testimony of</p>
<p class="indexsub"><em class="calibre8">See also</em> incarnation; christology; Mary; resurrection</p>
<p class="indexmain">Jinkins, Michael</p>
<p class="indexmain">Johnson, Elizabeth A.</p>
<p class="indexmain1"><em class="calibre8">Kairos</em></p>
<p class="indexmain">Kant, Immanuel</p>
<p class="indexmain">Kataphatic</p>
<p class="indexmain">Keller, Catherine</p>
<p class="indexmain">Kelly, J. N. D.</p>
<p class="indexmain"><em class="calibre8">Kenosis</em></p>
<p class="indexmain">Kierkegaard, Søren</p>
<p class="indexsub">offence of incarnation</p>
<p class="indexmain">Kimel, Alvin</p>
<p class="indexmain">kin-dom. <em class="calibre8">See</em> Kingdom of God</p>
<p class="indexmain">King, Martin Luther</p>
<p class="indexmain">Kingdom of God</p>
<p class="indexsub">and church</p>
<p class="indexsub">and hope</p>
<p class="indexsub">as kin-dom</p>
<p class="indexsub">as promised and desired by God</p>
<p class="indexsub">and resurrection</p>
<p class="indexsub">and salvation</p>
<p class="indexsub">characterized by justice</p>
<p class="indexsub">demanded in Lord’s Prayer</p>
<p class="indexsub">participation in</p>
<p class="indexmain">knowledge</p>
<p class="indexsub">knowing the unknowable</p>
<p class="indexmain"><em class="calibre8">koinonia</em></p>
<p class="indexmain">Kushner, Harold S.</p>
<p class="indexmain1">LaCugna, Catherine Mowry</p>
<p class="indexmain">LaHaye, Tim</p>
<p class="indexmain">language about God</p>
<p class="indexsub">analogical</p>
<p class="indexsub">equivocal</p>
<p class="indexsub">expansive</p>
<p class="indexsub">maternal (<em class="calibre8">see</em> God as mother)</p>
<p class="indexsub">univocal</p>
<p class="indexmain"><a id="page_368" class="calibre7"></a>Lehmann, Paul</p>
<p class="indexmain">Leibniz, Gottfried Wilhelm</p>
<p class="indexmain">L’Engle, Madeleine</p>
<p class="indexmain">Lewis, C. S.</p>
<p class="indexmain">liberation theology (and theologians)</p>
<p class="indexmain">Luther, Martin</p>
<p class="indexmain1">Mack, Burton</p>
<p class="indexmain">Mandela, Nelson</p>
<p class="indexmain">marriage</p>
<p class="indexmain">Marsden, George</p>
<p class="indexmain">Mary (Virgin, Mother of God)</p>
<p class="indexsub">annunciation/ virgin birth</p>
<p class="indexsub">Magnificat</p>
<p class="indexsub">mother of Jesus</p>
<p class="indexmain">McDowell, Josh</p>
<p class="indexmain">Methodist</p>
<p class="indexmain">Migliore, Daniel L.</p>
<p class="indexmain">Miller-McLemore, Bonnie</p>
<p class="indexmain">Milne, A. A.</p>
<p class="indexmain">Miriam</p>
<p class="indexmain">modalism</p>
<p class="indexmain">Moltmann, Jürgen</p>
<p class="indexsub">economic trinity</p>
<p class="indexsub">suffering God</p>
<p class="indexmain">moral exemplar (representational theory, Abélardian atonement)</p>
<p class="indexmain">mystery</p>
<p class="indexsub">of God</p>
<p class="indexsub">of Jesus</p>
<p class="indexsub">of Trinity</p>
<p class="indexmain1">Nazianzus, Gregory (Gregory of Nazianzus, also spelled Nazianzen)</p>
<p class="indexmain">New Jerusalem</p>
<p class="indexmain">Nicea</p>
<p class="indexmain">Nicene Creed</p>
<p class="indexsub"><em class="calibre8">filioque</em> and the council of Toledo</p>
<p class="indexmain">Nicodemus</p>
<p class="indexmain">Niebuhr, Reinhold</p>
<p class="indexmain">Nones (and Dones)</p>
<p class="indexmain">norming norm (the Bible as)</p>
<p class="indexmain">norms and sources. <em class="calibre8">See also</em> interpretation and Bible</p>
<p class="indexsub"><a id="page_369" class="calibre7"></a>experience as</p>
<p class="indexmain">Norris, Richard A.</p>
<p class="indexmain1">offense (scandal). <em class="calibre8">See</em> incarnation</p>
<p class="indexmain"><em class="calibre8">One Solitary Life</em></p>
<p class="indexmain">ontological</p>
<p class="indexmain">Oord, Thomas Jay</p>
<p class="indexmain">ordination (of women)</p>
<p class="indexmain">Osteen, Joel</p>
<p class="indexmain"><em class="calibre8">ousia</em></p>
<p class="indexmain">Outler, Albert</p>
<p class="indexmain1">parable</p>
<p class="indexsub">church as</p>
<p class="indexsub">prodigal son</p>
<p class="indexsub">sheep and goats</p>
<p class="indexmain">Parker, Rebecca Ann</p>
<p class="indexmain">participation. <em class="calibre8">See also</em> God</p>
<p class="indexsub">Holy Spirit drawing us into</p>
<p class="indexmain">partnership</p>
<p class="indexsub">God/Christ, with us</p>
<p class="indexsub">trinitarian</p>
<p class="indexmain">Pascal, Blaise</p>
<p class="indexmain">Paul (Apostle Paul)</p>
<p class="indexsub">wretchedness</p>
<p class="indexmain"><em class="calibre8">perichoresis</em></p>
<p class="indexmain">Perkinson, James</p>
<p class="indexmain">personal sin. <em class="calibre8">See</em> sin</p>
<p class="indexmain">Peter</p>
<p class="indexmain">Placher, William</p>
<p class="indexmain">Plaskow, Judith</p>
<p class="indexmain">Polkinghorne, John C.</p>
<p class="indexmain">Potok, Chaim</p>
<p class="indexmain">prayer</p>
<p class="indexsub">Lord’s Prayer</p>
<p class="indexsub">of confession</p>
<p class="indexmain">predestination</p>
<p class="indexmain">Presbyterian</p>
<p class="indexmain">prescriptive</p>
<p class="indexmain">pride. <em class="calibre8">See</em> sin</p>
<p class="indexmain">priesthood of all believers</p>
<p class="indexmain"><em class="calibre8">prolegomena</em></p>
<p class="indexmain">process theology</p>
<p class="indexmain">providence</p>
<p class="indexmain1">Ray, Stephen G.</p>
<p class="indexmain">reason</p>
<p class="indexmain">redemption. <em class="calibre8">See also</em> salvation</p>
<p class="indexmain">Reformation (the)</p>
<p class="indexmain">Repentance. <em class="calibre8">See</em> confession of sin</p>
<p class="indexmain">representational theory of atonement. <em class="calibre8">See</em> moral exemplar</p>
<p class="indexmain">resurrection (the)</p>
<p class="indexsub"><a id="page_370" class="calibre7"></a>and ascension</p>
<p class="indexsub">and atonement</p>
<p class="indexsub">of the dead</p>
<p class="indexsub">post-resurrection appearance</p>
<p class="indexmain">revelation</p>
<p class="indexsub">general</p>
<p class="indexsub">of God (self-revelation)</p>
<p class="indexsub">special</p>
<p class="indexmain">Rigby, Cynthia L.</p>
<p class="indexmain">Robinson, Marilynne</p>
<p class="indexmain">Rowling, J. K.</p>
<p class="indexmain">Ruether, Rosemary Radford</p>
<p class="indexmain">Rule of Love</p>
<p class="indexmain1">sacrament</p>
<p class="indexmain">Saiving, Valerie</p>
<p class="indexmain">salvation</p>
<p class="indexsub">and atonement theories</p>
<p class="indexsub">expansive</p>
<p class="indexsub">as “fire insurance”</p>
<p class="indexsub">as forgiveness</p>
<p class="indexsub">as freedom</p>
<p class="indexsub">as healing</p>
<p class="indexsub">history of God’s</p>
<p class="indexsub"><em class="calibre8">homoousion</em>/Chalcedon and</p>
<p class="indexsub">human participation in</p>
<p class="indexsub">and justification, sanctification, glorification</p>
<p class="indexsub">relationship to redemption (<em class="calibre8">see also</em> redemption)</p>
<p class="indexsub">story of salvation</p>
<p class="indexsub">and subjective appropriation of God’s grace</p>
<p class="indexsub">and universalism</p>
<p class="indexsub">whole person of Christ</p>
<p class="indexmain">sanctification</p>
<p class="indexmain">Satan (devil/s)</p>
<p class="indexmain">scandal (of the cross) (scandalized). <em class="calibre8">See</em> incarnation</p>
<p class="indexmain">scandal of particularity</p>
<p class="indexmain">Schaller, Lyle</p>
<p class="indexmain">Schneider, Laurel C.</p>
<p class="indexmain">Schneiders, Sandra</p>
<p class="indexmain">scholasticism</p>
<p class="indexmain">Schüssler Fiorenza, Elizabeth</p>
<p class="indexmain">science (scientific inquiry)</p>
<p class="indexsub">field of theology and</p>
<p class="indexsub">science-fiction</p>
<p class="indexmain">Scripture. <em class="calibre8">See</em> Bible</p>
<p class="indexmain">self-deprecation. <em class="calibre8">See</em> sin, feminine</p>
<p class="indexmain">Sheldon, Charles</p>
<p class="indexmain"><em class="calibre8">simul justus et peccatore</em></p>
<p class="indexmain"><a id="page_371" class="calibre7"></a>sin</p>
<p class="indexsub">brokenness and</p>
<p class="indexsub">concupiscence</p>
<p class="indexsub">corporate/systemic</p>
<p class="indexsub">as de-creation</p>
<p class="indexsub">feminine (self-deprecation)</p>
<p class="indexsub">personal</p>
<p class="indexsub">pride (<em class="calibre8">hubris</em>)</p>
<p class="indexsub">social model (of the Trinity)</p>
<p class="indexsub">as turning away (estrangement)</p>
<p class="indexmain">skepticism</p>
<p class="indexmain"><em class="calibre8">sola gratia</em></p>
<p class="indexmain">Sölle, Dorothee</p>
<p class="indexmain">soteriology. <em class="calibre8">See also</em> salvation</p>
<p class="indexmain">spectacles/eyeglasses of Scripture. <em class="calibre8">See</em> Bible</p>
<p class="indexmain">Spencer, Aída Bensaçon</p>
<p class="indexmain">Stevenson, William R.</p>
<p class="indexmain">substitutionary atonement (Anselmian atonement, satisfaction theory)</p>
<p class="indexmain">suffering</p>
<p class="indexsub">Jesus’s</p>
<p class="indexsub">our</p>
<p class="indexsub"><em class="calibre8">See also</em> cross</p>
<p class="indexmain">synod of Alexandria</p>
<p class="indexmain">systemic sin. <em class="calibre8">See</em> sin, corporate</p>
<p class="indexmain1">Tanner, Katherine</p>
<p class="indexmain">Terrell, JoAnne</p>
<p class="indexmain">testimony</p>
<p class="indexsub">of Jesus/Holy Spirit</p>
<p class="indexsub">of the Gospel</p>
<p class="indexsub">personal</p>
<p class="indexmain"><em class="calibre8">theosis</em></p>
<p class="indexmain">Thomas Aquinas (Saint Thomas, Thomas)</p>
<p class="indexmain">Thompson, Deanna A.</p>
<p class="indexmain">Thornton, John F.</p>
<p class="indexmain">three articles of faith</p>
<p class="indexmain">total depravity. <em class="calibre8">See</em> depraved</p>
<p class="indexmain">Trinity: immanent</p>
<p class="indexsub">expansive</p>
<p class="indexsub">economic (<em class="calibre8">see also filioque</em>)</p>
<p class="indexsub">Alexandria</p>
<p class="indexsub">as known</p>
<p class="indexsub">as mysterious</p>
<p class="indexsub">poor examples of</p>
<p class="indexsub">“so what” of</p>
<p class="indexmain">turning away. <em class="calibre8">See</em> sin</p>
<p class="indexmain1">universalism. <em class="calibre8">See</em> salvation</p>
<p class="indexmain">univocal. <em class="calibre8">See</em> language about God</p>
<p class="indexmain1">Van Dyk, Leanne</p>
<p class="indexmain">Varenne, Susan B.</p>
<p class="indexmain"><em class="calibre8">Velveteen Rabbit, The</em></p>
<p class="indexmain"><em class="calibre8">via negative. See apophatic</em></p>
<p class="indexmain">visible church. <em class="calibre8">See also ekklesia</em></p>
<p class="indexmain"><a id="page_372" class="calibre7"></a>vocation</p>
<p class="indexsub">the church’s</p>
<p class="indexmain1">Walker, Williston</p>
<p class="indexmain">Weil, Simone</p>
<p class="indexmain">Weiner, Eric</p>
<p class="indexmain">Wesley, John</p>
<p class="indexsub">atonement</p>
<p class="indexsub">grace</p>
<p class="indexsub">quadrilateral</p>
<p class="indexmain">Williamson, Marianne</p>
<p class="indexmain">Wiman, Christian</p>
<p class="indexmain">Winnie-the-Pooh</p>
<p class="indexmain">Word and word. <em class="calibre8">See also</em> Jesus as pre-existent Word; interpretation</p>
<p class="indexmain">WWJD</p>
</body>
</html>
