<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>Holding Faith</title>
    <meta content="urn:uuid:e0000000-0000-0000-0000-000004415877" name="Adept.expected.resource"/>
    <meta http-equiv="Content-Type" content="text/html; charset=utf-8"/>
  <link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="../../stylesheet.css"/>
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="../../page_styles.css"/>
</head>
  <body class="calibre">
<h2 class="h1"><a id="page_xvi" class="calibre5"></a><a id="page_xvii" class="calibre5"></a><a id="int" class="calibre5"></a>Introduction</h2>
<h2 class="h2a">T<small class="calibre11">RANSFORMING</small> T<small class="calibre11">HEOLOGY</small></h2>
<p class="noindent">One time, years ago, I was introduced to a church group as a “relevant theologian.” The pastor who introduced me kind of chuckled to himself, adding: “Now there’s an oxymoron, if I’ve ever heard one—a theologian who is <em class="calibre8">relevant</em>!” Everyone in the room laughed, and I laughed along with them as I rose to speak. Except that I felt a twist in the pit of my stomach. I was glad the pastor and the people were so honest, but I was disturbed by the way theologians were being caricaturized. I had to admit to myself, however, that there must be something true about the depiction if the mere mention of a theologian being “relevant” sends two hundred people into peals of laughter. This out-of-touch, head-in-the-clouds reputation is something we theologians need to change, and not only so we can do a better job of marketing Christian doctrine. We need to work on how we are perceived because such stereotypes are antithetical to the very core of what we claim to believe—that words about God do not sit at a distance from where people live and breathe precisely because the Word became flesh.<a id="rinten1" class="calibre7"></a><sup class="calibre12"><a href="notes.xhtml#inten1" class="calibre5">1</a></sup> If theologians talk about God, and God is present and active in our lives, then we’d better be talking about things that are relevant, or we are not talking about God at all.</p>
<p class="indent">Why is theology in general, and the discussion of Christian doctrines in particular, often thought of as “irrelevant”? I’d like to highlight three possible answers to this question, which I seek to address in the course of this book. First, I think theology and its related doctrines are sometimes thought to be irrelevant because they are not well enough explained or <a id="page_xviii" class="calibre7"></a>understood. Second, I think theology and doctrines are seen as irrelevant because they are associated with a kind of closed-mindedness and certainty that is unable effectively to engage others in an increasingly diverse and global world. Third and finally, I think theology and doctrines are seen as irrelevant because—in our crazy-busy, polarized culture—it is hard for us to make the time and space fully to explore them. The introduction will close with some reflection on how it is faith itself that motivates us to take the time and make the effort, because faith by its very nature seeks to know better what has touched and formed us.</p>
<h3 class="h2">L<small class="calibre3">EARNING</small> W<small class="calibre3">HAT</small> D<small class="calibre3">OCTRINES</small> A<small class="calibre3">RE</small> A<small class="calibre3">BOUT</small></h3>
<p class="indent">First, sometimes Christian doctrines are thought to be irrelevant because they are not well enough explained or understood. Theological discourse has its own technical language that, when it is not known, can seem to serve as a barrier to those who are trying to gain access to what it is about. Here are just a handful of some of the technical things theologians commonly emphasize: God created “out of nothing” (<em class="calibre8">ex nihilo</em>); human beings fell and are “totally depraved”; Jesus Christ is “of the same substance” (<em class="calibre8">homoousios</em>) as the Father; we are saved “by grace alone” (<em class="calibre8">sola gratia</em>) but are still “at the same time both righteous and sinners” (<em class="calibre8">simul justus et peccator</em>); we live between the “now and the not yet,” waiting for God’s Kingdom to come “on earth as it is in heaven.” Why do theologians put things in these certain ways, and what does all this stuff actually mean to the way we live <em class="calibre8">today</em>?</p>
<p class="indent">There have been many occasions when I have had the privilege of “opening up” a technical theological concept for a roomful of people who suddenly seem to grow in their awareness that theological truths are not enigmas to be deciphered by trained theologians, but gifts for us all. It is gratifying to see the light dawn on people’s faces when concepts they had always wondered about suddenly start to “click” into relevance. But it is hard to answer the question that inevitably follows: “So . . . if <a id="page_xix" class="calibre7"></a>that’s what it means, why didn’t someone just tell me earlier?” I want to figure out how we might more clearly and consistently explore and convey the relevance of Christian doctrines to our day-to-day lives. This is, in large degree, the stated purpose of this book: to get at the question of <em class="calibre8">why Christian doctrines matter</em> to our everyday lives of faith. Often enough, what seems to trigger the “ah-ha!” response of those I teach is not my dumbing down doctrine, but rather my unpacking the meaning of theological terms they have never before understood. The problem most often has nothing to do with the complexity of the theological concepts coming against the limits of their capacity to understand. The problem is simpler than that: people have never been taught the meaning of the terms themselves.</p>
<p class="indent">In my view, the solution to the obfuscation of Christian doctrines is not to reduce them to already-known language that can be readily understood. This common approach too often fails to communicate because what is distinctively meaningful about the terms in question can get lost in the process. One example of the problems caused by moving away from distinctively theological language is seen in a translation of Scripture that does not use the theological term <em class="calibre8">grace</em>, instead substituting words and concepts that are more readily understood, including “wonderful kindness” and the idea that we are treated “better than we deserve.”<a id="rinten2" class="calibre7"></a><sup class="calibre12"><a href="notes.xhtml#inten2" class="calibre5">2</a></sup> But there is something about grace that is different than “wonderful kindness”—isn’t there? In banning the theological term <em class="calibre8">grace</em> in favor of using language that is more immediately accessible, an important “so what?” of Christian doctrine is lost.<a id="rinten3" class="calibre7"></a><sup class="calibre12"><a href="notes.xhtml#inten3" class="calibre5">3</a></sup></p>
<p class="indent">Rather than changing the language, therefore, I will in this book try to do something I really work at in my teaching. That is, I will offer clear explanations of certain key technical terms, believing that as soon as readers know the basic meaning of a term, their feeling of being excluded or intimidated from what it is all about will dissipate. After all, the content of Christian doctrine is not the exclusive property of trained theologians, so why should they be the only ones who know how to access it? Some knowledge of technical terms will equip anyone who gains it to enter into the meaning-full worlds into which theological words invite us. <a id="page_xx" class="calibre7"></a>Theological terms, once unpacked, serve as portals through which anyone who looks can see theological landscapes wide open to exploration, discovery, and challenge. It might be appropriate to be intimidated by God, but it is never appropriate to be intimidated by words <em class="calibre8">about</em> God!</p>
<p class="indent">Let me try another way of making the case for why we might even <em class="calibre8">want</em> theology to sound technical, at least part of the time. Here’s an analogy I hope will be useful: When I go to the doctor, I expect and want that person to know more than I know. I don’t want doctors to talk over my head too much, of course. But I do like it if they say some things that are not obvious to me; things I have to ask questions about in order to understand. If they told me they didn’t bother learning any technical stuff in medical school because they didn’t think their patients would want to hear it, I would surely leave their office and go find another doctor. Maybe we should feel the same way about theological teachers and pastors. They should say “God is love,” but be able also to say <em class="calibre8">why</em> we believe that, when called upon to do so, explaining how Christian doctrines help deepen our understanding.</p>
<p class="indent">Those trained in theology, then, should be able to explain technical theological language in ways that help others have access. But they should also be able to speak coherently, in ordinary language, about what it is they know. Theologians, like all people of faith, should be “always prepared to give anyone who asks an account of the hope” that is in them.<a id="rinten4" class="calibre7"></a><sup class="calibre12"><a href="notes.xhtml#inten4" class="calibre5">4</a></sup> This instruction, offered to Timothy by the Apostle Paul, suggests that one way to keep theology relevant is to remember it is not for a closed club, but for the sake of the world. Because theology is for everyone, transformative theological ideas need to be explained in a language that can be understood and put into action also by those who are not theologically trained.</p>
<p class="indent">The complicating factor in all this is that we are all called to be theologians, whereas we are not all called to be doctors. Maybe on some level we recognize this, and this is why we are impressed when medical doctors use language that is above our pay scale, but slightly offended when trained theologians appear to be leaving us out of the discourse with their technical language. Not all patients are doctors, but every seeking person <a id="page_xxi" class="calibre7"></a>of faith is, in fact, a theologian—a person who talks about God. The word <em class="calibre8">theology</em> means, in fact, “words about God” (<em class="calibre8">theos</em> = “God” and <em class="calibre8">logos</em> = “words”). So, there are theologians who are trained in the technical language of the field, just as there are doctors, lawyers, and other professionals who are trained in the technical language of their fields. But there are also theologians who have not received advanced training and do not know the technical language. This does not mean they cannot understand theological language, but only that they may want to put some extra effort and attention into attending to the concepts the “doctors of the church” might in certain ways better understand, in order to discern the relevance of doctrine for our lives and the life of the world.</p>
<p class="indent">When doctrines are either not well explained or not well understood, the idea that theology is “irrelevant” is a kind of easy way out of the quagmire—it takes much less effort to declare theology “irrelevant” and walk away than it does to invest in deciphering it. Yet so many are willing to make a significant investment in sorting it all out, hoping that the search for understanding will be worth the investment. My experience has been that it is.</p>
<p class="indent">We begin by asking: “What is the content of theology?” and “Why does theology matter?” These are questions that need to be worked on in tandem with each other. It is because theology has substance that it finds meaning in the world. It is because theology proves itself to have real-life implications that it “pushes” people of faith to explore its substance. The philosopher Immanuel Kant once said, “Thoughts without content are empty; intuitions without concepts are blind.”<a id="rinten5" class="calibre7"></a><sup class="calibre12"><a href="notes.xhtml#inten5" class="calibre5">5</a></sup> Along the same lines, theological doctrines that don’t meet us in our experiences are worthless to us, and spiritual experiences that have no grounding in teachings passed on through ages might be pleasant in and of themselves, but they don’t connect concretely enough to real communities, histories, and ways of thinking to be able to influence them.</p>
<p class="indent">The suspicion that theologians have empty thoughts in the sense that they are obsessed with matters that are irrelevant to real life is a common one. For instance, you may have heard tell of the classic theological question: “How many angels can dance on the head of a pin?” This question is <a id="page_xxii" class="calibre7"></a>sometimes invoked to disparage theologians whose ideas do not appear to be generating products of measurable (and, preferably, immediate) value. It originated as a means of highlighting the obscurity of questions ostensibly explored by European theologians during the scholastic period, such as Bishop Anselm of Canterbury and Saint Thomas Aquinas.<a id="rinten6" class="calibre7"></a><sup class="calibre12"><a href="notes.xhtml#inten6" class="calibre5">6</a></sup> Why would these great intellectuals, people of faith who had so much to do and think about, spend time on such a seemingly irrelevant question? Going back to the development of the question itself helps us gain some clarity on this, while at the same time illustrating that even the most obscure-sounding theological claim has relevance to our lives once we work it a bit. Here goes: As it turns out, the popular formulation of the “pin” question doesn’t seem to be exactly how the scholastics asked it—the question as we know it was formed by those who mocked them. What we know about the scholastics is that they did ponder the character of angels as a way of getting at the difference between corporeal beings (including us) and spiritual beings (i.e., God) so that they could better articulate how we and God are related to each other. In a nutshell, they were trying to figure out what it means and why it matters to make the theological claim that God is immaterial (that is, a spiritual rather than a physical being). They suspected that thinking about angels would be a helpful step toward understanding the mystery of God because angels, like God, are spiritual beings. When our answer to the question “how many angels can dance on the head of a pin?” is “an infinite number,” they argued, we are correctly recognizing that spiritual beings do not take up any actual space, even when they are present somewhere. Thinking about the angels on the head of a pin helps us understand, they thought, how we can say God is everywhere without saying God takes up all the space. Corporeal beings have to take up space to be somewhere; God can be everywhere without taking up space.</p>
<p class="indent">How does this relate to us, and our relationship to God? We can say God is completely present in and to creation without thinking there is no space left for creation. We can know that the fact God is with us everywhere we go<a id="rinten7" class="calibre7"></a><sup class="calibre12"><a href="notes.xhtml#inten7" class="calibre5">7</a></sup> compromises not one bit on the space needed for us to be present, with our physical bodies. We can be reassured that God’s presence is always whole and entire even as it never pushes us aside.</p>
<p class="indent"><a id="page_xxiii" class="calibre7"></a>The point of raising this complicated question here is to show that even theological questions and explorations that are seemingly esoteric and abstract often have on-the-ground relevance that can begin to be discovered and discerned if we take the time to consider their origination and/or motivation. Once we have seen this, we can then pick up on what seemed to be at stake for our forebears and to run with it in our context, in relation to the issues we face in our twenty-first-century, globally connected lives. It would be silly not to start with the great contributions of those who have gone before us, but it would be irresponsible and just plain lazy of us not to take the theological baton extended by our forebears and run our hearts and minds out with it. We are the current generation of theologians. So, let’s appreciate what we have inherited, and then imagine what we can build from there!</p>
<p class="indent">Let me qualify this, lest I be misunderstood: Grabbing hold of the baton held by our forebears does not require us to believe all theological ideas are equally profound, relevant, or life-giving. Faithful theological work includes discerning when God-talk is irrelevant and when it is, in fact, destructive. Also, grabbing hold of the baton might for some of us be less about receiving something offered by a willing teammate and more about wrenching it out of their hands and running in a new direction. As we will see in <a href="chapter06.xhtml" class="calibre7">chapter 6</a>, for example, female theologians have in the last fifty years challenged the presumed correlation between “sin” and “pride” to include the sin of “self-deprecation.”</p>
<p class="indent">My hope, however, is that we can concede there have been real and necessary changes without assuming that anything we don’t understand, or anything that seems silly or outdated, has no relevance to our lives or to the life of the world. Sometimes, we’re too quick to write off ideas and doctrines when we cannot immediately see the so-called takeaway. In this book, we will do our best to give doctrines the benefit of the doubt. This doesn’t mean we will find all of them equally relevant, but it does mean we will give them a fair hearing. As Jacob wrestled with God, we will wrestle with some of the strange claims of Christian traditions, looking for what they have to offer us. My hope is that, like Jacob, we will walk away with the blessing, even if we walk away also with a limp.<a id="rinten8" class="calibre7"></a><sup class="calibre12"><a href="notes.xhtml#inten8" class="calibre5">8</a></sup></p>
<h3 class="h2"><a id="page_xxiv" class="calibre5"></a>R<small class="calibre3">ESISTING</small> A<small class="calibre3">RROGANCE</small>; R<small class="calibre3">EMEMBERING</small> M<small class="calibre3">YSTERY</small></h3>
<p class="indent">A second reason why we write theology off as irrelevant is because we associate it with a kind of certainty that cuts off conversation, rather than entering into healthy and productive dialogue. One of my favorite <em class="calibre8">Peanuts</em> comic strips, along these lines, features Snoopy sitting atop his doghouse, typing. Charlie Brown comes along and says, “I hear you’re writing a book on theology. I hope you have a good title.” “I have the perfect title,” Snoopy replies, as he types: “<em class="calibre8">Has It Ever Occurred to You That You Might Be Wrong?”</em><a id="rinten9" class="calibre7"></a><sup class="calibre12"><a href="notes.xhtml#inten9" class="calibre5">9</a></sup></p>
<p class="indent">I used to keep a copy of this comic on my office door alongside another that someone gave me. I’ve never been able to trace its origination. In the foreground stands a man who has apparently just been asked by a woman (silhouetted in the background) why he is talking so loudly. “You want to know why I’m speaking so loudly?” he yells back. “I’ll tell you why I am talking so loudly! Because I’m <em class="calibre8">wrong</em>—that’s why!” he says.</p>
<p class="indent">Both of these comics make us laugh, I think, because they bring to light what on some level we already know—that being right isn’t everything. When we leverage our “rightness” at the expense of being in conversation, the cost is too high. When we assert it even when we are wrong in an attempt to override our fear and vulnerability, something of who we are is certainly lost. We might laugh because we have been in the presence of know-it-all religious people or loud-mouthed colleagues who mildly bully everyone around them with their “rightness.” Or we might laugh because we see something of ourselves in these characters and they make us appropriately uncomfortable, challenging us to change.</p>
<p class="indent">A mentor, Bob, once asked me a question that shapes how I think about “rightness” in relation to talking about God. He asked me, “Would you rather be <em class="calibre8">boring</em> or <em class="calibre8">wrong</em>?”</p>
<p class="indent">If we wanted to be right at all costs, we wouldn’t worry too much about being interesting. We might articulate things slowly and carefully, taking no risks. If being right were our only goal, whether theology and church are boring or not would be a matter of little concern. What we <a id="page_xxv" class="calibre7"></a>would care about is accuracy, watching our step, keeping the rules, demonstrating our piety—whatever got us to “right.”</p>
<p class="indent">Except, of course, that the Gospel calls us not to be bound to rules but to live in freedom. And Jesus’s message isn’t that we should err on the side of safety but that we should take risks. We should risk vulnerability (as he emptied himself for us<a id="rinten10" class="calibre7"></a><sup class="calibre12"><a href="notes.xhtml#inten10" class="calibre5">10</a></sup>), risk upsetting the status quo (as he overturned the money changers in the synagogue<a id="rinten11" class="calibre7"></a><sup class="calibre12"><a href="notes.xhtml#inten11" class="calibre5">11</a></sup>), risk including outsiders as well as insiders (as he did by inviting fishermen to be disciples; by eating with tax collectors and sinners; by accepting the Canaanite woman as having “great faith”<a id="rinten12" class="calibre7"></a><sup class="calibre12"><a href="notes.xhtml#inten12" class="calibre5">12</a></sup>). We should risk, even, looking foolish for the sake of obeying the will of God (as when Jesus decided to feed five thousand–plus people with five loaves and two fish<a id="rinten13" class="calibre7"></a><sup class="calibre12"><a href="notes.xhtml#inten13" class="calibre5">13</a></sup>).</p>
<p class="indent">Of course, what Bob had (intentionally) laid out for me was a false dichotomy. One doesn’t have to choose between being right and being interesting. Because God is our subject matter, as theologians, and because our subject matter is both beautiful and good, and because beauty and goodness are <em class="calibre8">interesting</em>, to be boring is, actually, <em class="calibre8">not</em> right—not right at all! This is glorious news, to those of us who care about theological language being beautiful, interesting, and compelling as well as accurate, true, and right.</p>
<p class="indent">It seems to me that God calls us first and foremost to focus not on being “right,” but on being faithful disciples. I think along these lines of Peter, who gives Jesus a “right” answer but nonetheless completely misses what Jesus is calling him to do and to be. “You are the Christ, the Son of the living God,” Peter says, and Jesus responds by telling him he has given the answer that is “right”<a id="rinten14" class="calibre7"></a><sup class="calibre12"><a href="notes.xhtml#inten14" class="calibre5">14</a></sup>—specifically, Jesus says that Peter is blessed, that the “Father who is in heaven” has revealed this to Peter, and that Peter will be the “rock” upon which the church is built.<a id="rinten15" class="calibre7"></a><sup class="calibre12"><a href="notes.xhtml#inten15" class="calibre5">15</a></sup> But in the story that follows, just a few verses later, the same Peter who gave the perfect answer cannot imagine that the one he calls Christ would be called to go the way of suffering. Peter argues with Jesus about what will come to pass, and Jesus rebukes him, saying, “Get behind me, Satan!”<a id="rinten16" class="calibre7"></a><sup class="calibre12"><a href="notes.xhtml#inten16" class="calibre5">16</a></sup> Peter may have given the right answer, but it turns out he has no idea what he is talking about.</p>
<p class="indent"><a id="page_xxvi" class="calibre7"></a>The story of Peter reminds us that whatever we do know that is right about God pales in comparison to the reality of who God is. If we say, for example, “God is love,” we are saying something that is true. But we have only the vaguest idea of what this love is all about, if we compare our understanding to the actuality of God’s love, which is greater than any human language can convey, greater than any human understanding can fathom. We will consider, in the first chapter, how it is that we can speak of God given the fact that God is infinite and we are finite. If God is primarily mysterious, why bother saying anything at all? And how do we decide what it is we should say, if the possibilities for what can be said are endless? How do we know when something being said about God is wrong?</p>
<p class="indent">Many spiritual-but-not-religious people in American culture, fed up with religious people who talk too often as though they are right, are testing less traditional ways of participating in the mystery that is beyond us all. These might include the “Nones”—the “religiously nonaffiliated” who do not identify with any particular Christian denomination. It might also include the “Dones”—those who have declared that “enough is enough,” leaving their church communities for being too judgmental or too hypocritical even as they profess that they are still Christians. It includes people who are curious, in doubt, and/or skeptical; people who associate the overabundance of certainty they often find in churches with standing in the way of their spiritual journeys. To them, Christian doctrine is irrelevant when it seems more focused on giving right answers than on exploring open questions.</p>
<p class="indent">My hope is that book will help change the perception that theology is irrelevant by being genuinely open to learning from uncertainties as well as certainties. Because this is a book about what Christians believe and why what Christians believe matters, it assumes most of its readers are people of faith. But it doesn’t require readers to think of themselves as having great faith in order to gain from it. What it does hope for is that the people who read it are curious about what it is they believe, and why they believe it. It also invites readers to think about what teachings of the Christian faith they do not believe, and why they don’t believe them. <a id="page_xxvii" class="calibre7"></a>Along these lines, this book welcomes into its pages and ideas the hearts and minds of those who are curious enough to be skeptical of certain claims made by the Christian faith, and skeptical in ways that lead to further pursuit of what matters rather than to “shutting down” in relation to matters of faith. I think, for example, of biblical figures such as Nicodemus and Thomas, both of whom are skeptical of seemingly bizarre ideas like being “born again” or bodily resurrection. But their skepticism, at least insofar as it drives their curiosity, leads them to pursue opportunities to investigate further.</p>
<p class="indent">This emphasis on curiosity as both closely related to faith and including enough wiggle room for good doses of healthy skepticism leaves open the possibility that this book will be of interest not only to those who self-identify as “Christian,” but also to spiritual seekers such as the “Nones.”<a id="rinten17" class="calibre7"></a><sup class="calibre12"><a href="notes.xhtml#inten17" class="calibre5">17</a></sup> Is there a way of saying Nones also have a kind of faith—insofar as they are driven by curiosity about what really matters, about whether there really is something worth believing, and about what this something would be? What do we make, for example, of Eric Weiner, a religious journalist and author of <em class="calibre8">Man Seeks God</em>,<a id="rinten18" class="calibre7"></a><sup class="calibre12"><a href="notes.xhtml#inten18" class="calibre5">18</a></sup> who has gone on record saying he is “hoping someday to believe in God,” asking for “a new approach to religion that is “highly interactive and absolutely intuitive”?<a id="rinten19" class="calibre7"></a><sup class="calibre12"><a href="notes.xhtml#inten19" class="calibre5">19</a></sup> I hope this book will have something valuable to say not only to professing Christian believers, but to Weiner and to everyone who is curious about exploring what it is they believe, do not believe, and/or want to believe.</p>
<p class="indent">I imagine Anselm was saying something important about curiosity when he insisted Christians be people of <em class="calibre8">fides quarens intellectum</em> (“faith seeking understanding”).<a id="rinten20" class="calibre7"></a><sup class="calibre12"><a href="notes.xhtml#inten20" class="calibre5">20</a></sup> It would be boring to have faith and never push on it, to never pursue understanding of it. Similarly, Weiner, nine centuries later, imagines a faith that is “highly interactive and intuitive.”<a id="rinten21" class="calibre7"></a><sup class="calibre12"><a href="notes.xhtml#inten21" class="calibre5">21</a></sup> Weiner suggests what he is hoping for, today, is a “new approach to religion” that works to connect us to the metaphysical the way an iPad connects us to the web. He is tired, it seems, of religions that claim to be exhaustive; religions in which “God does not laugh”; religions that seem to barricade rather than open us to the bigness of what really matters.</p>
<p class="indent"><a id="page_xxviii" class="calibre7"></a>Interestingly, some of the greatest writers in theological history (those who could never have imagined iPads!) would have joined Weiner in critiquing religion that seems to shut down, rather than to open up, curiosity and inquiry. “If you understood, it would not be God,” Saint Augustine said, back in the fifth century CE, pushing us neither to confine ourselves comfortably to nor to wield around definitively any given thought, doctrine, or saying about God.<a id="rinten22" class="calibre7"></a><sup class="calibre12"><a href="notes.xhtml#inten22" class="calibre5">22</a></sup> “God is that than which nothing greater can be conceived,” wrote Anselm, eight centuries after Augustine.<a id="rinten23" class="calibre7"></a><sup class="calibre12"><a href="notes.xhtml#inten23" class="calibre5">23</a></sup> When we remember that what we are trying to talk about or participate in is always greater than our words or efforts, we can be candid about our skepticism, we can keep feeding our curiosity, we can deign to imagine, play in, and contribute to the coming of God’s Kingdom on earth as it is in heaven—all without risk of creating idols of own making. While the worlds of our imaginations will ultimately come up against limits, the world God imagines and desires for us is bounded only by God’s own determination. Whatever God has in store, we are promised, is always more than the best we can ask or imagine.<a id="rinten24" class="calibre7"></a><sup class="calibre12"><a href="notes.xhtml#inten24" class="calibre5">24</a></sup></p>
<h3 class="h2">M<small class="calibre3">AKING</small> T<small class="calibre3">IME TO</small> R<small class="calibre3">EFLECT</small></h3>
<p class="indent">A third reason why theology and its related doctrines have gained a reputation for being irrelevant is simply because there is little encouragement, at least in the context of our overextended American culture, to take the time to figure out what it is all about. There is a crisis in <em class="calibre8">thinking</em> in the US: people are either too busy or too tired to do it. Edward Hallowell, in his best-selling book <em class="calibre8">CrazyBusy</em>, suggests we need to make time to think if we are going to make changes in our lives or in the life of the world.<a id="rinten25" class="calibre7"></a><sup class="calibre12"><a href="notes.xhtml#inten25" class="calibre5">25</a></sup> And even making <em class="calibre8">time</em> isn’t enough, with the world teeming around you. According to one <em class="calibre8">New York Times</em> article, we also have to find <em class="calibre8">space</em> for quiet, in a culture committed to noise.<a id="rinten26" class="calibre7"></a><sup class="calibre12"><a href="notes.xhtml#inten26" class="calibre5">26</a></sup> Making the time to read about and ponder Christian doctrines is difficult, but there is no other way, really, to begin grasping their substance, so we can then move on to exploring their <a id="page_xxix" class="calibre7"></a>impact and relevance. Deepening understanding inevitably takes at least some invested time and effort.</p>
<p class="indent">Remember how Winnie-the-Pooh used to go to his “Thoughtful Spot” in order to think in “the most thoughtful way he could think”?<a id="rinten27" class="calibre7"></a><sup class="calibre12"><a href="notes.xhtml#inten27" class="calibre5">27</a></sup> It was right between his house and Piglet’s, and there were even times when the two met there to ponder difficult questions together. Do you have a thoughtful spot in your world? A place where you can go to think, to pray, to read, to ponder the practical significance of Christian doctrine? It seems to me that, with the portability of computers and reading devices, it should be relatively easy to find a place to think—it might even be the public space of a coffee shop! More difficult, perhaps, is making the effort on a day or in a week when it seems we have absolutely nothing extra to give.</p>
<p class="indent">There are voices all around us that try to temper our concern about not having the space and time to think by assuring us thinking is over-rated—<em class="calibre8">doing</em> is where it’s at. I certainly agree that there is such a thing as too much thinking and too little doing. I remember, as a kid, my dad would sometimes tell my brothers and me “to quit our navel gazing and get to work.” He was good at snapping us out of whatever unproductive reveries we were engaged in. And my mom sometimes advised me to “Don’t think; just do”—usually she said this when I was overthinking things, exhausted, and just needing to get my homework done so I could go to bed. Unquestionably, my parents were onto something. Developing the capacity to <em class="calibre8">do</em> is a great life skill to have in your bag of tricks, when you really need to crank it out.</p>
<p class="indent">The problem comes when not-thinking and just-doing becomes a way of life. One of my favorite T-shirts says on the front: “Liberal Arts Educated.” And on the back of it: “Will Think for Food.” What makes this so funny is the idea that anyone could get <em class="calibre8">paid</em> (in food or in any other way) for thinking. We don’t pay for thinking, pondering, or treasuring. We pay for <em class="calibre8">doing</em>. Culturally, we have moved away from valuing a liberal arts education <em class="calibre8">for its own sake</em>.<a id="rinten28" class="calibre7"></a><sup class="calibre12"><a href="notes.xhtml#inten28" class="calibre5">28</a></sup> The faster we can get from the thinking to the doing, the better.</p>
<p class="indent"><a id="page_xxx" class="calibre7"></a>When I think of biblical models of thinkers, Mary—the mother of Jesus—immediately comes to mind. She always seems to be “pondering.” Sometimes I imagine her, lying on the floor of that barn with her new baby, fighting away the urge to ask Joseph to send those shepherds away so they can have a little time and space for just the three of them—a new family. But then she hears them talk about seeing the angels, and she remembers. And so, in the midst of this hectic scene, in the midst of their crazy story, Mary has the wherewithal to be amazed: to remember, treasure, and ponder, once again. Some have chalked this up to maternal sentimentalism—<em class="calibre8">you know how new mothers are</em>. Except that she’s still at it twelve years later, long after Jesus’s onesies have been passed on to a younger child.</p>
<p class="indent">At another point in the story, Mary and her family have traveled to Jerusalem for the Passover. On their way home, Jesus goes missing. Joseph and Mary assume he is traveling with friends and relatives. When they don’t see him for a day, they start looking, finally winding up all the way back in Jerusalem, where they find Jesus—after <em class="calibre8">three days</em>—sitting and talking in the temple with the teachers.</p>
<p class="indent">Mary scolds Jesus for being inconsiderate. “Child, why have you treated us like this?” she asks. “Look, your father and I have been searching for you in great anxiety.” Notice that, for a change, it is not Mary doing the pondering. Rather, it is <em class="calibre8">Jesus</em> who has been pondering—studying Torah with the scribes. Like mother, like son, I suppose. And I think Jesus is possibly reminding his mother of their shared habit when he shoots back, at his parents, the following questions: “Why were you searching for me?” and “Did you not know that I must be in my Father’s house?” I imagine the conversation might have gone further: <em class="calibre8">Mom, you have been pondering the words of the angel Gabriel since the day I was conceived. You were amazed at the story shared by the shepherds at the time of my birth, and you’ve always puzzled over the prophecies of Simeon and Anna. Mom, you’ve always reminded me to seek to do the will of God. Where else could I possibly have been but here? How could you not have figured this out sooner?</em> And Mary treasures the ponderings of her son and is reminded again of who he is, and who she is. “Let it be unto me as you have said” (she probably <a id="page_xxxi" class="calibre7"></a>repeats, under her breath, after counting to ten!). “Behold, I am the Lord’s servant.”<a id="rinten29" class="calibre7"></a><sup class="calibre12"><a href="notes.xhtml#inten29" class="calibre5">29</a></sup></p>
<p class="indent">You might be reading this on the cusp of another wave of busyness. It might be an especially hectic time at work. Maybe you are a parent during a too-packed spring in which you will feel lucky simply to survive all the play rehearsals, soccer practices, and standardized tests you’ve got to get your kids through. Or maybe it is late fall, and you are gearing up for the slew of holiday preparations that always seem to overtake everything else. Or perhaps you are a pastor, with too many people needing too much of your attention all in the same week. “Just keep swimming,” we remember Dory telling us in <em class="calibre8">Finding Nemo</em>.<a id="rinten30" class="calibre7"></a><sup class="calibre12"><a href="notes.xhtml#inten30" class="calibre5">30</a></sup> Just keep moving, and all will be well, the wisdom goes.</p>
<p class="indent">In contrast to Dory’s advice, the suggestion here is not that we just “keep swimming,” but that we pause to reflect on who we are in relation to the God who has entered into life with us and called us “blessed.”<a id="rinten31" class="calibre7"></a><sup class="calibre12"><a href="notes.xhtml#inten31" class="calibre5">31</a></sup> How do we make the time, and where do we make the space, to ponder this? We might need to stop our swimming, now and again. We need to recognize that we are constantly in danger of getting so caught up in the frenzy of doing that we forget to think. And if we don’t think, what we do might be done energetically, but it will never serve what matters most.</p>
<p class="indent">Mary and Joseph search frantically for their lost twelve-year-old son, Jesus. But Jesus isn’t impressed in the least by their exhausted, emergency-driven, uncentered efforts. <em class="calibre8">Why were you searching for me?</em> he asks. <em class="calibre8">Didn’t you know where I would be?</em></p>
<p class="indent">I wonder if Jesus asks us the same questions. As with Mary and Joseph, we are, perhaps, seeking to find him. My guess is that anyone reading this book wants to make a difference in the world. Many of us want to live what it means to be Christian, or at least to check in on what it means. Maybe we want to make sure our church stays faithful, relevant, and appealing. And so we get a little hyper about it all, and move faster, and consult with neighbors and relatives about what it is they have seen and what they think it will take. We, like Mary and Joseph, are frantically trying to find Jesus in new places and in new ways.</p>
<p class="indent"><a id="page_xxxii" class="calibre7"></a><em class="calibre8">But didn’t you know where I would be?</em> Jesus asks us, a bit surprised that we have gotten so far off track. <em class="calibre8">I really thought you would know</em>.</p>
<p class="indent">Perhaps we should stop “doing,” for a moment. Perhaps we should pause, find a thoughtful spot, and think. Consider the doctrines of the faith and what they have to offer; think about them in the midst of the panic about declining church numbers, or concern about church disagreements, or new solutions to the worship wars. Recognize that Christ has entered all the way into the depth of creaturely brokenness, even unto death on the cross. We <em class="calibre8">do</em> know where he is—don’t we? He is in this world—his Father’s house—studying and conversing. He has already joined with us in pondering the great mystery that is our faith.</p>
<p class="indent">You who are reading this book have already decided to put aside some time and energy for reflection: for thinking and for pondering, for figuring out what doctrines are <em class="calibre8">about</em>. As I write this, I wish we could see you face-to-face to wish you all the best in this endeavor! I sincerely hope that at least some of what you find here provides a service to you both in terms of offering some basic information about doctrines, and also in terms of suggesting how these doctrines impact our daily lives and our particular ministries. You will find that I include some exercises, reflection questions, and discussion starters here and there that I hope will help the relevance of particular doctrines click with you. Most of these have been tried and tested in my classes at Austin Seminary, and/or with church groups. The point of all of these is to remember, in the very structure of this book, that theology is not off in the proverbial ivory tower, but on-the-ground.</p>
<h3 class="h2">O<small class="calibre3">UR</small> S<small class="calibre3">TARTING</small> P<small class="calibre3">OINT</small>: F<small class="calibre3">AITH</small> H<small class="calibre3">OLDS</small> C<small class="calibre3">HRIST</small></h3>
<p class="indent">As we begin, a few words about faith are in order. This is because, if we believe theology matters, we are likely beginning the theological enterprise with a certain modicum of faith. Now, let me say from the outset that this faith can certainly include doubt. I have suggested that a seed of faith can be found even in skepticism—at very least in that version of skepticism <a id="page_xxxiii" class="calibre7"></a>that seeks to wonder and pays homage to mystery, and possibly even in skepticism that fights hard against belief.<a id="rinten32" class="calibre7"></a><sup class="calibre12"><a href="notes.xhtml#inten32" class="calibre5">32</a></sup> Jesus suggests we don’t need a lot of faith to begin seeking, to begin following, to begin acting. He said, specifically, that even if we had only a mustard-size seed’s worth of faith, we could move mountains.<a id="rinten33" class="calibre7"></a><sup class="calibre12"><a href="notes.xhtml#inten33" class="calibre5">33</a></sup> Apparently, a little bit of faith goes a long way toward contributing to the healing of a world that often seems impossibly broken.<a id="rinten34" class="calibre7"></a><sup class="calibre12"><a href="notes.xhtml#inten34" class="calibre5">34</a></sup> Just a little faith can “hold” us in place as participants contributing to the mending of the world.</p>
<p class="indent">Some of the claims of theology do look like they need to be swallowed with more than just a spoonful of faith, I’ll admit. Consider the Virgin Birth, the Second Coming, the resurrection of the body, the forgiveness of sins . . . these are all elements of the Apostles’ Creed<a id="rinten35" class="calibre7"></a><sup class="calibre12"><a href="notes.xhtml#inten35" class="calibre5">35</a></sup> most of us find to be difficult, if not impossible, to fathom. A dose of faith is necessary to get us started at imagining what these statements could possibly mean, and how they might actually matter. A little faith is even a necessary precursor to doubting some of the strange claims of the Christian faith, it seems to me. In order to doubt, we have to believe enough in what the Bible and the creeds say to bother wrestling with it at all, even to wind up rejecting it. A little faith lends itself to spiritual seeking, which ideally leads to greater understanding.</p>
<p class="indent">But what is it that we are to put our faith <em class="calibre8">in</em>, exactly? Surely, it is not the case that we should put our faith in <em class="calibre8">doctrines</em> (meaning “teachings of the church”). The purpose of doctrines is to direct us to the proper locus of our trust, by assisting us in helping to see the big picture of Scripture (more about this role of doctrine in <a href="chapter02.xhtml" class="calibre7">chapter 2</a>). Neither should we put our trust in the text of Scripture itself. All of Scripture is “profitable” for “equipping” us,<a id="rinten36" class="calibre7"></a><sup class="calibre12"><a href="notes.xhtml#inten36" class="calibre5">36</a></sup> but it is not <em class="calibre8">in</em> Scripture that we put our trust. It is not our faith <em class="calibre8">in Scripture</em> that holds us, but our faith <em class="calibre8">in God</em> that does.<a id="rinten37" class="calibre7"></a><sup class="calibre12"><a href="notes.xhtml#inten37" class="calibre5">37</a></sup> “Have faith in God,”<a id="rinten38" class="calibre7"></a><sup class="calibre12"><a href="notes.xhtml#inten38" class="calibre5">38</a></sup> Jesus tells his disciples in the Gospel of Mark. “You believe in God, believe also in me,” he says in the Gospel of John. Holding faith, Jesus suggests, is about laying claim to the hope that what God has promised will come to fruition. This includes Jesus’s own promises—to the disciples, and to us—that he has actually not abandoned us, even when the circumstances of our lives and this world seem to indicate otherwise. <a id="page_xxxiv" class="calibre7"></a>“Don’t be troubled,” he says. “I won’t leave you as orphans.”<a id="rinten39" class="calibre7"></a><sup class="calibre12"><a href="notes.xhtml#inten39" class="calibre5">39</a></sup> “When I go to prepare a place for you, I will return and take you to be with me so that where I am you will be too.”<a id="rinten40" class="calibre7"></a><sup class="calibre12"><a href="notes.xhtml#inten40" class="calibre5">40</a></sup> Faith that holds refuses to give up on promises like this, even when it is colored by doubts or skepticism.</p>
<p class="indent">I love the biblical story of the man who holds tightly to faith, desperate for his son’s healing. “If you can do anything, help us! Show us compassion!” he says to Jesus. “<em class="calibre8">If</em> you can do anything?” Jesus exclaims. “All things are possible for the one who has faith.” “I have faith,” said the man, immediately, “help my lack of faith!”<a id="rinten41" class="calibre7"></a><sup class="calibre12"><a href="notes.xhtml#inten41" class="calibre5">41</a></sup> This father’s faith is interlocked with doubt, but he refuses to let go of it because he wants so badly for his son to be healed. It is this doubt-riddled faith that drives him to seek understanding; that leads him to seek Jesus; that strengthens him not to be bogged down by his skepticism, but to force out an affirmative, if honest, answer to Jesus’s question.</p>
<p class="indent">Martin Luther argued, back in the sixteenth century, that what faith holds on to most directly is not even God’s promises, but Jesus Christ himself. “Faith takes hold of Christ and has Him present, enclosing Him as the ring encloses the gem,”<a id="rinten42" class="calibre7"></a><sup class="calibre12"><a href="notes.xhtml#inten42" class="calibre5">42</a></sup> Luther says. Faith unites us to the Christ in whom we participate, the Christ who makes us righteous, the Christ who is present to us and who shares with us everything he has. He is the content to which our faith clings; the one in whom we live and move and have our being; the Savior of the world and also of each and every one.</p>
<h3 class="h2">M<small class="calibre3">OVING</small> F<small class="calibre3">ORWARD ON THE</small> J<small class="calibre3">OURNEY</small>: W<small class="calibre3">E</small> H<small class="calibre3">OLD</small> F<small class="calibre3">AITH</small></h3>
<p class="indent">Our faith holds Christ, but we also hold faith. One of the million-dollar questions in theology is: Do we have the capacity, in and of ourselves, to generate faith? Theologians through the ages have generally agreed that human beings cannot achieve faith on their own. The big debate is whether or not they contribute anything at all. Thomas Aquinas thought that human beings were capable of making their way toward God; that God had <a id="page_xxxv" class="calibre7"></a>instilled every human creature with this capacity. Calvin held that human beings had enough capacity that they could turn in the right direction, but (following his interpretation of Romans 1) he thought that soon thereafter they were liable to create idols rather than to worship the one true God. Wesley thought faith was out of range for human beings apart from God’s doing; at the same time, he thought human beings (assisted by prevenient grace) do have a part to play: they choose whether to accept, or to reject, God’s extended gift.</p>
<p class="indent">The theologian with whom I resonate most, on this, is Karl Barth. Barth lived from 1886 to 1968 and is part of the Reformed tradition, following John Calvin. Barth observed that human beings who believe they have the capacity to contribute something of their own to God’s work of salvation were apt to mistake their own agendas for the will of God. His idea was that even our faith is a gift of God. He describes faith, in fact, as a kind of surplus grace, explaining that “grace is so truly grace, and so truly free as grace, that it is capable of this (doubly undeserved) superfluity.”<a id="rinten43" class="calibre7"></a><sup class="calibre12"><a href="notes.xhtml#inten43" class="calibre5">43</a></sup></p>
<p class="indent">The faith we hold is the faith that holds Christ, and the faith that holds Christ is surplus grace. It is a faith that will never let us go because it is an overflow of the unconditional love of God.</p>
<p class="indent">It is with the confidence that God’s got us—even when we doubt or are skeptical—that we forge ahead.</p>
</body>
</html>
