<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>Holding Faith</title>
    <meta content="urn:uuid:e0000000-0000-0000-0000-000004415877" name="Adept.expected.resource"/>
    <meta http-equiv="Content-Type" content="text/html; charset=utf-8"/>
  <link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="../../stylesheet.css"/>
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="../../page_styles.css"/>
</head>
  <body class="calibre">
<h2 class="h2x"><a id="page_xi" class="calibre5"></a><a id="pre" class="calibre5"></a>P<small class="calibre11">REFACE</small></h2>
<p class="noindent">Welcome to <em class="calibre8">Holding Faith: A Practical Introduction to Christian Doctrine</em>. My hope, as the author of this book, is to in some way companion with you on your faith journey. I’m imagining that you have this book in hand because you desire to know something more about the major <em class="calibre8">doctrines</em> (or teachings) of the Christian faith. I am betting you also want to explore the “so what?” of them—that is, why they matter to our lives and to the life of the world. This is my passion: to enter into the treasure trove of the Christian faith and revel in what we have inherited, sorting through it all with curiosity, honesty, and integrity. While some of what we discover there has obvious application to our lives, other pieces must be tinkered with before their value can be discovered. While some of what is there knocks us out with its beauty and life-giving energy, other findings seem to distort what is true, honorable, just, pure, pleasing, commendable, excellent, and worthy of praise.<a id="rpreen1" class="calibre7"></a><sup class="calibre12"><a href="notes.xhtml#preen1" class="calibre5">1</a></sup> There are times, therefore, when exploration of Christian doctrine leads us to grieve and even repent of the ways Christianity has done harm.</p>
<p class="indent">Perhaps you are a pastor, youth pastor, or church leader and are responsible for teaching others. You might already be well-read in theology and know a great deal about what Christian doctrines look like. You might be aiming less at learning the theological basics and are coming to this book with the hope that it will help you explore how the historic doctrines of the church are connected to what is going on, concretely, in the life of the twenty-first-century church and world. Or you might be coming to this book as a student of theology who is enrolled in a course in a college <a id="page_xii" class="calibre7"></a>or at a seminary. In that case, my hope is that this book will help you gain a basic grasp of major Christian doctrines as well as explore why and how they matter to our lives of faith. Finally, perhaps you self-identify not as a Christian believer but as a seeker who wants to learn if Christianity has anything to offer. If this is the case, I’m hoping this book can also serve you—both by (1) helping you appreciate the value of certain pieces in the treasure trove of the faith by showing you what life they bring to the world and (2) by honestly naming the ways in which the teachings of Christianity have fallen short and even, at times, done harm. The aim here is always to talk about Christian doctrines in ways that promote abundant life.</p>
<p class="indent">I write this book as someone who has been teaching theology for over twenty years. I teach seminary students, laity, pastors, Christian educators, and anyone else who is interested. I teach theology in a lot of different contexts: in classrooms and lecture halls; in church sanctuaries, fellowship halls, and Sunday school rooms; at conference and retreat centers; online and on location. Sometimes I am given under an hour to consider, with a class, why the Trinity matters in real life; sometimes I am asked to pack as much of my regular, twelve-week introductory theology course into a one-week intensive class, or even into a single intensive weekend, as I possibly can. Other times I have the luxury of spending several sessions on a theological theme, such as “Living into God’s Amazing Grace,” “Being a Christian in a Crazybusy World,” “What Difference Does It Make to Believe in God?” or “Confronting (the) Cross.” The one commonality in all these teaching and learning occasions is that people keep showing up and wanting more. Students, pastors, educators, and laypersons; men and women; people of all ages, life circumstances, and educational levels. People keep on coming, and they want to learn—and to share—as much as they can. Why do they come, and why do they want to press as much theological study into the limits of whatever space and time is available? I think the answer to this is clear. It is because they hope and believe theology matters both to their lives and to the life of the world.</p>
<p class="indent">I am aware that the assertion that people keep showing up for theological reflection flies in the face of current cultural and ecclesial rhetoric, which highlights the demise of the mainline churches<a id="rpreen2" class="calibre7"></a><sup class="calibre12"><a href="notes.xhtml#preen2" class="calibre5">2</a></sup> and the so-called <a id="page_xiii" class="calibre7"></a>secularization—or at least “dechristianization”<a id="rpreen3" class="calibre7"></a><sup class="calibre12"><a href="notes.xhtml#preen3" class="calibre5">3</a></sup>—of our culture. At the moment I am not interested in offering an analysis of or making a case against any of these phenomena. I am simply making the anecdotal observation that, whatever the statistics and changing realities regarding the role of institutionalized religion in American society, people are consistently interested in thinking about theology. I am convinced the reason for this is because they haven’t given up the hope that, in one way or another, theology matters.</p>
<p class="indent">If you are reading this book, you likely believe theology matters. Perhaps you want to deepen in relation to what you already know. Perhaps you want to know more about how, for example, the Christian confession that God is Trinity plays out in real life. Or maybe for you the jury is still out on whether or not theology matters, and you are looking at these pages with the hope that it does, wanting to be convinced. It might be that you come from a background (whether conservative or liberal) where you were told that theology matters, but your ideas for <em class="calibre8">why</em> and <em class="calibre8">how</em> it matters are shifting. Or maybe you have until recently had the mind-set that theology does not really matter much at all, but you are beginning to think there might be more to it all than you have always presumed. I have students in my theology classes who have come from each and all of these places, and I have stopped at some of them myself as I’ve journeyed with theology. Regardless of where you are coming from, I hope this book offers you something meaningful.</p>
<p class="indent">I understand this book to be an ongoing, collaborative, effort. This might seem in one sense an odd thing to say, given that I am the one who is doing all the “talking” by way of the words written in this text. What I mean is that I approach the writing of this book as an extension of teaching my introductory theology class at Austin Presbyterian Theological Seminary. Along these lines, my philosophy of teaching inevitably floods the tone of the prose and the flow of the content I choose to present. If the ideas presented here invite you as a reader to reflect theologically, I give a great deal of credit to the hundreds of students over the years whom I have had the privilege of teaching. They tell me I helped them become theologians; they have certainly helped me become a better one. In each <a id="page_xiv" class="calibre7"></a>year’s new classroom of students, there are always different circumstances that drive different emphases. This means that my ongoing interaction with my students continues to shape the ideas presented in this book.</p>
<p class="indent">It is my students first and foremost, then, whom I need to thank for helping me shape what is worthwhile in this volume. For its flaws I take complete responsibility. I am indebted also to the many pastors who have invited me to spend weekends with their church communities, teaching and preaching, learning always more about how local churches both nurture those who come through their doors and reach beyond their walls to participate in the work of the Spirit in the broader community. I thank Austin Presbyterian Theological Seminary, the institution I have proudly served since 1995, for encouraging me to be the theologian I’ve always wanted to be: a theologian who cares about the “so what?” of Christian doctrines for everybody. I am particularly indebted to President Theodore J. Wardlaw and Academic Dean David H. Jensen, as well as to our supportive board of trustees. In particular, I appreciate the encouragement of Austin Seminary Trustee Judge David Peeples, who read the proposal and first chapters and offered constructive suggestions. I also owe a debt of gratitude to my student researchers and ministerial colleagues, Rev. Amanda Mackay and Ms. Pamela Jarvis. Amanda helped me with the early research. Pam walked with me through every word and every footnote, editing, suggesting, rewriting, and inspiring along the way. I am blessed to have her as a colleague and friend.</p>
<p class="indent">I am grateful, also, for the work and vision of Abingdon Press. I thank Kathy Armistead, former editor at Abingdon, for believing I have something to offer and soliciting this book. I thank David Teel for his patience, ongoing encouragement, theological prowess, passion for movies, and editorial skills. My conversations with him have fed this book as it has taken shape over the years.</p>
<p class="indent">Finally, I am grateful for my immediate family for their love and support. For Bill Greenway, my spouse, friend, and theological colleague, who challenges me always to love the world as God so loves it. For my children, Xander and Jessica, who surprise and delight me every day with theological insights and questions that have never before occurred to me. <a id="page_xv" class="calibre7"></a>For my brothers, Scott and Mark Rigby, who challenge me never to assume I have arrived at what it means to “hold faith,” but continuously to think critically and expansively about the faith in which we were raised.</p>
<p class="indent">I dedicate this book to my parents, the Rev. Charles and Ethel Rigby, who nurtured me in the Christian faith and have journeyed with me through the decades, as my theological understandings have changed and deepened. And I write it with the hope that Xander, Jessica, and all the children of this world will continue exploring how theology matters.</p>
</body>
</html>
