<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>Holding Faith</title>
    <meta content="urn:uuid:e0000000-0000-0000-0000-000004415877" name="Adept.expected.resource"/>
    <meta http-equiv="Content-Type" content="text/html; charset=utf-8"/>
  <link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="../../stylesheet.css"/>
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="../../page_styles.css"/>
</head>
  <body class="calibre">
<h2 class="h2x"><a id="page_349" class="calibre5"></a><a id="ref" class="calibre5"></a>R<small class="calibre11">EFLECTION AND</small> D<small class="calibre11">ISCUSSION</small> Q<small class="calibre11">UESTIONS</small></h2>
<h3 class="h3z">I<small class="calibre23">NTRODUCTION</small>: T<small class="calibre23">RANSFORMING</small> T<small class="calibre23">HEOLOGY</small></h3>
<p class="numberhang">1. What do you think of when you think of <em class="calibre8">theology</em>? Do you agree with the author that every person who holds faith is a theologian? What does this mean to you?</p>
<p class="numberhang">2. People of faith are often accused, these days, of acting like know-it-alls. Do you agree that there is a problem with this? How is it possible to speak about God in ways that are both confident (e.g., about God’s love for the world) and humble (i.e., honoring the divine mystery)?</p>
<p class="numberhang">3. Where, in your life, do you create “spaces” for theological reflection/thinking about God?</p>
<h3 class="h3z">C<small class="calibre23">HAPTER</small> O<small class="calibre23">NE</small>: H<small class="calibre23">OW</small> C<small class="calibre23">AN</small> W<small class="calibre23">E</small> S<small class="calibre23">PEAK OF</small> G<small class="calibre23">OD</small>? T<small class="calibre23">HE</small> D<small class="calibre23">OCTRINE OF</small> R<small class="calibre23">EVELATION</small></h3>
<p class="numberhang">1. There is an exercise in the chapter that asks you to reflect on how you react and relate to mystery, connecting possible reactions to characters in movies. Was this exercise helpful, and why or why not?</p>
<p class="numberhang"><a id="page_350" class="calibre7"></a>2. What is the value of thinking of language for God as analogical as opposed to univocal or equivocal?</p>
<p class="numberhang">3. What do you think of the idea that theology is in the business of saying “something about everything”? Do you agree that this is what people want and need to hear?</p>
<p class="numberhang">4. What is the relationship between general and special revelation? Do you think it is important to distinguish between them? Why or why not?</p>
<h3 class="h3z">C<small class="calibre23">HAPTER</small> T<small class="calibre23">WO</small>: W<small class="calibre23">HERE</small> D<small class="calibre23">O</small> W<small class="calibre23">E</small> F<small class="calibre23">IND THE</small> R<small class="calibre23">IGHT</small> W<small class="calibre23">ORDS TO</small> S<small class="calibre23">AY</small>? T<small class="calibre23">HE</small> D<small class="calibre23">OCTRINE OF</small> S<small class="calibre23">CRIPTURE</small></h3>
<p class="numberhang">1. Complete the authority exercise that is included in the chapter. What understandings of authority came into play as you ranked the items on the list? Do you understand the Bible to be authoritative, and if so, in what sense?</p>
<p class="numberhang">2. John Wesley understood tradition, experience, and reason—along with Scripture—to come into play as we seek to find and form our words about God. Does this resonate with your own discerning processes? In what sense, if at all, do you think the Bible serves as the “norming norm” of all other sources about God?</p>
<p class="numberhang">3. Reflect on why Calvin used the analogy of “spectacles” for the Bible. What other analogies might be helpful?</p>
<h3 class="h3z">C<small class="calibre23">HAPTER</small> T<small class="calibre23">HREE</small>: W<small class="calibre23">HERE</small> D<small class="calibre23">OES</small> G<small class="calibre23">OD</small> M<small class="calibre23">EET</small> U<small class="calibre23">S</small>? T<small class="calibre23">HE</small> D<small class="calibre23">OCTRINE OF THE</small> I<small class="calibre23">NCARNATION</small></h3>
<p class="numberhang">1. How does each of the Gospel writers begin the story of Jesus differently, and how do where they begin shape their understanding of who Jesus is?</p>
<p class="numberhang"><a id="page_351" class="calibre7"></a>2. At the Council of Nicea in 325, what did our forebears decide about who Jesus Christ is in relation to the Father? Why does the <em class="calibre8">homoousion</em> matter to so many people who hold faith?</p>
<p class="numberhang">3. Why did our forebears (i.e., at Chalcedon in 451) think that to confess Jesus Christ as “fully human and fully divine” is “for our sake and the sake of our salvation”? How does <em class="calibre8">who</em> Jesus is save us?</p>
<p class="numberhang">4. What does the doctrine of the incarnation teach us about who God is? What does it teach us about who we are in relationship to God?</p>
<h3 class="h3z">C<small class="calibre23">HAPTER</small> F<small class="calibre23">OUR</small>: I<small class="calibre23">N</small> W<small class="calibre23">HAT</small> W<small class="calibre23">AYS</small> D<small class="calibre23">OES</small> G<small class="calibre23">OD</small> C<small class="calibre23">LAIM</small> U<small class="calibre23">S</small>? T<small class="calibre23">HE</small> D<small class="calibre23">OCTRINE OF THE</small> T<small class="calibre23">RINITY</small></h3>
<p class="numberhang">1. How do you experience God as <em class="calibre8">one</em>, and what is your experience of God as each of the three persons? Do you, in your spirituality, resonate more with one of the three persons of the Trinity than with the other two?</p>
<p class="numberhang">2. What are the pluses and minuses of using the traditional language of “Father, Son, and Holy Spirit” for God? Why might we want to supplement that language with more expansive language for God, such as maternal language?</p>
<p class="numberhang">3. What is the <em class="calibre8">filioque</em> debate all about, and why does it matter? Do you think that believing the Holy Spirit proceeds from the Father <em class="calibre8">and the Son</em> compromises on the full status of the Holy Spirit as equally God? What are the strengths and weaknesses of thinking of the Spirit as the “bond of love” between the Father (Lover) and Son (the Beloved), as Saint Augustine suggests?</p>
<p class="numberhang">4. What difference does it make to our lives of faith that we hold the “threeness” of God in tension with the “oneness” and vice versa? Discuss the concept of <em class="calibre8">perichoresis</em>–is it helpful to you to think that God “dances” with Godself, and we with God, and we with one another in the context of Christian community?</p>
<h3 class="h3z"><a id="page_352" class="calibre5"></a>C<small class="calibre23">HAPTER</small> F<small class="calibre23">IVE</small>: W<small class="calibre23">HO</small> D<small class="calibre23">ID</small> G<small class="calibre23">OD</small> C<small class="calibre23">REATE</small> U<small class="calibre23">S TO</small> B<small class="calibre23">E, AND</small> W<small class="calibre23">HAT</small> W<small class="calibre23">ENT</small> W<small class="calibre23">RONG</small>? T<small class="calibre23">HE</small> D<small class="calibre23">OCTRINE OF</small> C<small class="calibre23">REATION</small></h3>
<p class="numberhang">1. If creation was made all good, and by a good God, where did evil come from? Why did Saint Augustine define evil as “the absence of good”? Why do some contemporary theologians (such as James Cone) question this definition?</p>
<p class="numberhang">2. What are thought to be the benefits of believing God created us <em class="calibre8">ex nihilo</em> (out of nothing)? Why do some theologians take issue with the idea?</p>
<p class="numberhang">3. Do you think human sinfulness is an aberration, meaning not true to who God made us to be? Or are we sinners, from our core, right from the start? Make a biblical/theological case for your position.</p>
<h3 class="h3z">C<small class="calibre23">HAPTER</small> S<small class="calibre23">IX</small>: W<small class="calibre23">HO</small> I<small class="calibre23">S</small> G<small class="calibre23">OD</small> M<small class="calibre23">AKING</small> U<small class="calibre23">S</small> I<small class="calibre23">NTO</small>? T<small class="calibre23">HE</small> D<small class="calibre23">OCTRINES OF</small> S<small class="calibre23">IN AND</small> S<small class="calibre23">ALVATION</small></h3>
<p class="numberhang">1. How does Jesus save us, exactly? How did you answer that question before you read this chapter, and what questions about your understanding (if any) did the chapter provoke?</p>
<p class="numberhang">2. What is “salvation,” exactly? What is it that Jesus saves us <em class="calibre8">from</em> and <em class="calibre8">for</em>? In what sense is salvation grounded in history, as James Evans insists?</p>
<p class="numberhang">3. Discuss the three main approaches to the atonement: Anselm’s view (substitutionary atonement), Abélard’s view (moral exemplar theory), and <em class="calibre8">christus victor</em>. What are the strengths and weaknesses of each?</p>
<p class="numberhang">4. What do you think of this idea of centering our understanding of salvation around the whole person and story of Jesus Christ, rather than solely around his death on the cross? What would we gain from doing that in our lives of faith? What would we lose?</p>
<h3 class="h3z"><a id="page_353" class="calibre5"></a>C<small class="calibre23">HAPTER</small> S<small class="calibre23">EVEN</small>: W<small class="calibre23">HERE</small> I<small class="calibre23">S</small> O<small class="calibre23">UR</small> H<small class="calibre23">OME</small>? T<small class="calibre23">HE</small> D<small class="calibre23">OCTRINE OF THE</small> C<small class="calibre23">HURCH</small></h3>
<p class="numberhang">1. How well does the metaphor of “home” work for understanding the church? What other metaphors might we use for understanding the blessing of the church?</p>
<p class="numberhang">2. How are the internet, social media, and other technologies changing the way we think about community? Can an avatar take Communion? Why or why not? What is the importance of flesh and blood bodies to life in community?</p>
<p class="numberhang">3. What is the relationship between the church visible and the church invisible (Calvin), between the <em class="calibre8">ekklesia</em> and the <em class="calibre8">koinonia</em> (Gutiérrez)?</p>
<p class="numberhang">4. The author lists a number of elements that “make” church in the second half of the chapter. What are they, and with which do you most resonate? What would you add?</p>
<h3 class="h3z">C<small class="calibre23">HAPTER</small> E<small class="calibre23">IGHT</small>: W<small class="calibre23">HAT</small> D<small class="calibre23">OES</small> I<small class="calibre23">T</small> M<small class="calibre23">EAN TO</small> B<small class="calibre23">E</small> G<small class="calibre23">OD</small>’<small class="calibre23">S</small> C<small class="calibre23">HILDREN</small>? T<small class="calibre23">HE</small> D<small class="calibre23">OCTRINE OF THE</small> C<small class="calibre23">HRISTIAN</small> L<small class="calibre23">IFE</small></h3>
<p class="numberhang">1. “How is it with your heart?” Reflect on this question and discuss with wise people whom you trust. Why is it important that every theologian consider this question, according to the chapter?</p>
<p class="numberhang">2. Why is it often challenging to hold faith?</p>
<p class="numberhang">3. According to the chapter, what is the <em class="calibre8">risk</em> of holding faith, jumping into the pool of grace? What is the <em class="calibre8">cost</em> of jumping in? What is the <em class="calibre8">promise</em> as we surface the water? And what does it look like to <em class="calibre8">practice</em> faith, to swim in the pool alongside others?</p>
<h3 class="h3z"><a id="page_354" class="calibre5"></a>C<small class="calibre23">HAPTER</small> N<small class="calibre23">INE</small>: W<small class="calibre23">HERE</small> A<small class="calibre23">RE</small> W<small class="calibre23">E</small> H<small class="calibre23">EADED</small>? T<small class="calibre23">HE</small> D<small class="calibre23">OCTRINE OF</small> C<small class="calibre23">HRISTIAN</small> H<small class="calibre23">OPE</small></h3>
<p class="numberhang">1. What are your greatest hopes? What are your greatest fears? How is the doctrine of Christian hope related to these?</p>
<p class="numberhang">2. How is the cross a symbol of Christian hope?</p>
<p class="numberhang">3. What do the resurrection and the ascension lead us to hope for in the future but also in our present, day-to-day lives as people of faith?</p>
<p class="numberhang">4. How might exercising imagination help us share Christian hope with the world? What are the risks that come with being imaginative? How do we go about imagining what God desires rather than reducing Christian hope to our own wishful thinking?</p>
<h3 class="h3z">C<small class="calibre23">HAPTER</small> T<small class="calibre23">EN</small>: W<small class="calibre23">HAT</small> A<small class="calibre23">RE</small> W<small class="calibre23">E</small> C<small class="calibre23">ALLED TO</small> D<small class="calibre23">O</small>? T<small class="calibre23">HE</small> D<small class="calibre23">OCTRINE OF</small> C<small class="calibre23">HRISTIAN</small> V<small class="calibre23">OCATION</small></h3>
<p class="numberhang">1. What does Karl Barth mean when he says we should not miss “the hour of fire” that is “right here and now”? What is the fire, and what are we in danger of missing?</p>
<p class="numberhang">2. How exactly do we go about imagining and participating in the music of God’s Kingdom in such a way that we facilitate its coming to “earth as it is in heaven”? Is this, even, what we are called to do? Or should we leave this work up to God and focus, instead, on being patient? Should people who hold faith be patient or impatient in relation to the coming of God’s Kingdom?</p>
<p class="numberhang">3. How do we know what it is God wants us to do exactly? Is Allan Boesak right that we always have to be ready, or we may miss opportunities that will affect the way the world looks tomorrow?</p>
<p class="numberhang">4. How does the ongoing study of theology contribute to the “renewal of our minds,” readying us to do “the good, acceptable, and perfect will of God”? What are you taking away from this book that will support you in holding faith as you live, act, and shape this world God so loves?</p>
</body>
</html>
